> Oh, Lord, we are thankful to be Your people. Thank You for the extent of Your love, going all the way to death and back to make us Your own and to set us free from the drive of the flesh, to give us control over what comes from within by the power of Your Spirit.

> Lord, we're thankful that You have died for us, that You've given us Your own life, that we're Yours forever, and that we are not just slaves, but the wonder of being Your bride and getting to go with You in life and know You deeply as we go through this life and right on into the next with You.

> Lord, we ask that You will speak to each of us, that You will underline for each one the truths that are especially for us to walk in right now. We ask that being in this rich text will bring new freedom for us to walk with You and to set aside in practice the lifestyle of the flesh that comes naturally to all of us.

> Lord, thank You for the real progress that we make in this life and in many areas of our lives, and that You promise to complete what You've begun. We ask You, Lord Jesus, to fill us by Your Spirit, to hear You and to walk with You, heart and heart, according to Your ways. Thank You for the joy that You give us as we do that, and the wisdom to be part of Your work in a broken world. Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.

Welcome. Wonderful to know that we have a living Lord, and He is with us wherever you are.

In the last few weeks, we've been looking at step two of how to change. And we saw, in the second half of Romans 6, that our natural lifestyle is one of sin, of building a lifestyle of lawlessness, of just doing what we want. And the result, the fruit, is death. Lots of forms of death. Separation from you, from the Lord, from others. Depression, frustration, anger, all of the above and much more.

But we saw that because of the death of Jesus and our now being His, we now have the opportunity to build a new lifestyle. We have the Holy Spirit. We're each one here, a new creation filled with the Lord's life. And the encouragement to step one was to welcome that from the heart and in specific areas of our lives.

And then the step two is starting to trust the Lord to build a lifestyle of change, not just staying the same. Now I've got the Lord's life. I'm forgiven. I'll go to heaven. What's the big deal? I can just coast. And we saw that coasting results in just doing the old.

Instead, the second half of Romans 6, we have the opportunity, choice by choice, to choose to build a new master, our old master with sin, now respond to our new Master, Jesus, who has bought us out of the slave market of sin, and choice by choice to build a new lifestyle, sanctification, being set apart for our created purpose. And it's fulfilling. And the fruit is eternal life of knowing intimacy with the Father and the Son, and that that is available as we learn to make choices in the practical areas of our lives and build new lifestyles.

We saw last week that the wonder that though Jesus has the right to be our Master, He's bought us out of the slave market of sin, we're His. He's actually made us His bride, all of us. And the wonder that we get to respond to Him, to go with the One who loves us, and that it's on a far higher plane than just obedience to a new Master, even though the Master is infinitely good.

In the latter part of Romans 6, we saw that even if obedience were a matter of slavery, Jesus is a far superior Master to sin. But then in Romans 7, the beginning, we see that we're not actually, He does not make us His slaves. He takes us as His bride, which actually is figured in the Mosaic law. There's a provision that someone who is a woman who's captured in warfare does not have to be made a slave because a man could take her as his bride instead. And that looking ahead to the awesome reality of what Jesus does with us.

As we approach the matter of obedience, it's really key to recognize that we're responding not to a Master. We're not under law, we're under grace, but we're not even subject to a human Master. It's Jesus, the Divine One who became a human being and as such by taking on our sin purchased us and has made us His bride, which means the reference point for obedience is the One who loves us enough to have given Himself, given His life up totally for us. He gave up His rights to human life for us. He remains the eternal Son of God. Did not give up His Divine life.

But as step two is about what do we do moment by moment. What do we do occasion by occasion of temptation? And what do we do moment by moment of occasion to be able to obey and enjoy the benefits thereof?

And I've got to say, as a wife, what woos me to go with Steve is his love. And that's what we have in the Lord. Not a husband (or master) who is yelling at us and just barking commands, but demonstrating His love. And that woos our trust and our desire as free will agents to go with Him and to join Him heart and heart in all that He calls us to, because we're joining Him there.

Romans 6:22 assured us that by serving God, we have the fruit of that obedience resulting in sanctification. Easy to overlook, because it's a theological term that we run across all the time. We often don't really think about what it means. But it means being put to our intended purpose. And our purpose is to glorify God by becoming more and more like Him in practice and thereby radiating the picture, the living picture that we are, of His nature and His working.

This is fulfilling our purpose that God has designed into us in creating us in His image and commissioning us to rule, to manage the affairs of life, and the outcome of that, eternal life.

And as we note, Jesus has defined eternal life for us. It is knowing God, our Heavenly Father, and Jesus Christ, whom He has sent. Being the Son of God who has lived on earth as a human being, has lived a perfect life, which none of us ever has, but getting to know Him. And as we become more and more like Him in practice, we get to know Him better and better.

Knowing someone is not a binary, yes, no thing. Do you know the Lord? That can be answered yes or no. No usually being, what do you mean? But the next question is, okay, you know the Lord. How well do you know the Lord?

We do this just when we're talking with somebody. Do you know Joe Blow? Yeah, I know Joe Blow. How well do you know Joe Blow? I met him at a party once. No, I lived with him for two years as a roommate when I was in college. You know him a lot better than somebody who's just met somebody.

Eternal life is knowing, is intimate acquaintance with. How do you become acquainted with someone? You observe them. You spend time with them. You do things together with them. You converse with them. You share ideas and find out what each other thinks about things and what's important to them, all those sorts of things.

And this process that is enabled, is furthered, by obedience, by every time that we obey the instructions that God has given us to succeed in life, we get to know Him better. We become more like Him. We become more what God created us and has enabled us to become. And that's very fulfilling.

And we get to know God more and more deeply.

After the explanation of our being not merely God's slaves but Christ's bride, and learning that He is not our master but our loving husband, whose objective is to fulfill all of our potential and give us the blessings, fulfillment of that. Then we have seven verses five and six.

While we were in the flesh, the sinful passions, the reactions against obedience, the sinful passions, which were aroused by the law of, "Tell me what to do. I will not. Tell me what not to do. I will too."

I think we've mentioned we had friends who had twin boys, and when they were four or five, they liked to go around the house reciting all the rules while breaking them. The whole point of that was reciting. They were singing them while they were breaking them. They were having fun because they were breaking the rules.

The sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in the members of our body to bear fruit for death, causing us to use our body to do what God says not to do or to turn our body away from doing what God says to do.

But now we've been released from the law. We're not obeying rules. We're obeying the One who loves us intensely and is fully qualified to guide us, to care for us, to bring us to real fulfillment, having died to that by which we were bound. We serve in newness of the Spirit and not oldness of the letter.

Now, the rest of Romans 7 is going to explain why it is impossible to serve successfully, which requires patience, obeying the instructions that tell us how to serve successfully, how to live out what we're intended to be and become that more and more in more and more maturity. Why we can't do that if our focus is on the letter of the instructions, rules, rather than our divine head in spiritual marriage, Jesus.

First in Romans, the rest of Romans 7, we'll see why it actually is not possible if our attention is on the rules rather than on the One Who is inviting us to succeed by obeying, not because it's a rule, but because it's an opportunity for real life.

When temptation comes, we have the opportunity to see it as an opportunity for life and turn away from it. Then as we are aware of what God calls us to, the reading in the Word or hearing a sermon, whatever, we have the opportunity to enter into more life, to become more of what God intends us to do and to get to know God better and better and express Him, communicate by example His calling to all people.

We now come to this question. Now we start the analysis of where is the problem? Verse 7.

**What should we say then? Is the law sin? No way. On the contrary, I would not have come to know sin. I would not have come to recognize the existence of sin, or the nature of it, except through the law.** If I weren't aware that God gives us commandments, positive and negative, do this, don't do that, we wouldn't be aware of sin because you can't react. If nobody tells you what to do, you can't refuse to do it. If nobody tells you what not to do, you can't determine and insist on doing it anyway. Sin has to have something to react against. Sin itself is the determination not to be told what to do and not do by anyone else but myself.

With this question, is the law sin? Is the law the problem? That's a very current issue. It's always been current. Our society wants to say that these are just uptight religious laws saying, "Don't sleep around," and that's just uptight religious doctrine. We should throw it out. That's the problem. It makes people feel guilty. It makes people feel ashamed. It makes it hard for them to go and get the proper equipment to get condoms and so on. And we should just get rid of that standard.

And that's how our society has tried to solve it. But it doesn't solve the heartache of broken relationships. It doesn't solve unwanted pregnancies. It doesn't solve the human issues that the Lord was seeking to protect us from. But society wants to say the law is the problem. But Paul will be looking at this and saying, actually, the problem is somewhere else.

And Paul now explains how he discovered sin. Remember, Paul was a Pharisee, the strictest sect of Israelites. And they were determined to keep the law totally and to make sure that everybody else did. And Paul says elsewhere that he was doing great. He thought he was really on the top of the pile. And he's explaining now how he realized that he wasn't Mr. Goody Goody that he thought he was, Mr. Perfect.

He said, **"I would not have known about coveting if the law had not said 'You shall not covet.'"**

You can sum up the Ten Commandments very quickly or list them. Make God number one. No substitutes. Don't try to manipulate Him. Honor your father and mother. Don't take a person's life, wife, goods, reputation, or even desire to do so.

That's the hook. Paul said, I could do all those things, of course, if I defined each one of them narrowly enough. But it was the don't even desire to do so. And that's where he got caught. Because he discovered no matter how hard he tried, he could not keep himself from desiring to do something. It didn't matter what it was, but he couldn't keep himself from desiring to do differently from what God says.

An example of that, if you're familiar with the Desert Fathers, the hermits of the medieval centuries who decided they wanted to leave temptation behind, they completely left society and went out in the deserts of Judea and Sinai to just meet with the Lord. And they found to their horror that temptation didn't leave them. That now that their mind was free, there was lust of every kind that came up. And they were constantly battling lust, sin, desire, even though they couldn't act on it out there.

Is the law the problem? And is temptation the problem? No. They found that they carried the issue with them and in them.

One thing to note here, Paul is using sin in a way that we don't usually use it. We're all familiar with the idea of sin as departing from the Lord's ways, sin as breaking the rules, sin as the mess, sin as the cause of guilt, and of the mess that results from breaking the rules.

We usually don't think of sin as an active agent. But that's what Paul is talking about, that sin is a dynamic. And it's a dynamic that is present in every human being and that goes to work. And it is that determination not to be under the authority of anyone else. We're all born with an allergy to authority. Very deep-seated, fundamental allergy to authority.

Paul says, **"Sin taking opportunity through the commandment produced in me coveting of every kind, for apart from the law, sin is dead."**

I think this comes out from two good things that we're all aware of. God created us in His own image. We all have an innate sense, even people who are not conscious of the creation statement. But we all know that we are like God. And we are, because we're created in God's image. But being like God doesn't necessarily make a person godly. Godly has to do with what you do with that.

The other thing is we all have a sense we're born to rule. And God has commissioned us to rule in the arena of living beings, to rule the animals, that is to be benevolent. But of course, after the fall, it gets corrupted into animal abuse and so forth. But the point is, we have this innate sense that I'm like God and I should be in charge. And that is a recognition. But now with that recognition. Then we become aware. I don't want anybody else call the shots in my life. And that makes me aware of this dynamic in me, this resistance to authority.

Paul says that as he looked at the rules initially to congratulate himself on how wonderful he was because he kept the law, that meant he was focusing on the law. And then he began to become aware that the more he focused on the law, the more he had a strong desire welling up within him to violate it.

He says, **I was once alive apart from law. But when the commandment came, sin became alive, and I died.**

I was alive in that I could choose anything I wanted. But then when I started encountering commandments, demands that I do something or not do something, then I no longer had free choice because I was compelled to fight against being told what to do or not do. And I didn't really have free choice. I couldn't do what I would have done in the absence of the rule.

I can do it, but I can't do it consistently because in order to satisfy my determination to know for a fact that nobody tells me what to do or not to do, every once in a while, I have to affirm that by refusing to do what I'm told to do or not do.

Paul recognizes that there is this reaction within him, this rebellion against being told what to do or not do. **"The commandment, which was to result in life, proved to result in death for me."**

He's actually talked about this in Romans 1, which are the steps down when we react against our calling, which is to glorify God, to show forth the Lord and give thanks. He's God, not me, for the way He set things up, not how I would set things up. There are three types of choices that we make. And we looked at this much earlier today. But the second one, and they result in the natural consequences that God has built in.

The second one, which is what this part of Romans is addressing, is in Romans 1:25. **For they exchanged the truth of God for literally the lie and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator who is blessed forever. Amen.**

I'm saying, I'm God, not you. And we've had former students serving in other countries who've had lab mates who said, I'm God. And they could not get along with anybody. They were terrible. No one could get along with them because their bottom line determination was, I need to be in control.

And it says, **"For this reason, God gave them over to degrading passions."** And that's what we're talking about in this section. It's the result of saying, I need to be the one in control. Nobody else tells me what to do. And the passions are this reaction.

Passions are reactive emotions. They're not rational because they're driven by the principle, nobody tells me what to do or not do. They don't take into account what it is. They just react against being told what to do.

The aspect of sin that we had in step one is the lust, the compulsive drives. If X is necessary for life, I must have it, do it, experience it. If Y blocks life, I must avoid it, resist it, not let it happen to me. But this has to do with the issue of being told what to do or not do. And it's a reactive emotion that's not rational because it doesn't waste time thinking about what it is being told to do or not do. All it focuses on is reacting against it.

And we've had various students over the years who decided to check their parents' faith that they grew up with and said, I am so glad I'm done with those restrictions and headed into the big party scene. And we knew the heartache and the scars that that student would be building, and Lord willing would turn before too long, before there were too many scars, but it's never too late.

But it was easy for them to say, I'm so glad to throw off all those restrictions instead of realizing I'm throwing off wisdom for long-term well-being for me and those I impact. But that's deep within all of us, and that's what he's addressing today.

Okay, now he concludes. **"Then the law is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good."** The law is holy. It's totally consistent with the true God. And the commandment, likewise, is holy and righteous. It's in line with God's character. It accomplishes what God is about accomplishing, and it's good. It's beneficial. It's good in its impact, good in its effect. We've decided, okay, the problem is not the law.

Before we get into verses 13 to 23, which is the analysis of why it's not possible to succeed in becoming Godlike in practice by focusing on the law, we need to recognize a problem in our translations.

Romans 7 is probably the most confusing and misunderstood chapter in the Bible. The explanation of Jesus being our husband, not our master, is confusing to people because of not examining what is presented really carefully, and because of confusion, especially over who's the first husband. But as we noted, the first husband is the incarnate Christ offering Himself on the cross, which is the only time that it would have been equal yoking for us who are sinful by nature to be joined with Him, who then dies, which ends that marriage, so that we're free to remarry the risen Christ.

That's the first point of confusion. We went over that last week.

Now, the other point of confusion is that translators are very inconsistent in translating the key terminology in this passage. Paul uses two different terms that get translated routinely as good, three different terms that get translated routinely as do, one term that is confusing because it's used in two different senses, and the phrase in which it's embedded makes that clear. And that's law, which general meaning is it's an inviolable principle. There are no exceptions to it.

Translators and editors then get confused about when to capitalize law, meaning the Mosaic law, and when not to capitalize it. And it should be translated law always. It's either the law or law of, which makes the distinction. People get confused because of not following these distinctions.

We are offering you a translation, which we will read through, where the term for good that refers to intrinsic beauty and desirability, we translate consistently as ideally good. The term for good that means useful, beneficial in its impact, we translate always as good in effect. The three terms for do, the term for engaging in an activity, we translate always as practice. To carry a process forward, we translate consistently as work into effect. And to generate a result, we translate consistently as produce.

Hopefully it will be clear. Last night in class, we read this out loud and one of the students said, "now it's clear! Now it makes sense." Not that it's simple. It's not clear because it's simple, but it's clear because we can understand clearly what Paul is saying. And then we still have to work through the argument that he's presenting to explain this.

We pick up in verse 13, **"Then did that which is good in its effect become death for me? No way. Sin, in order to become apparent as sin, worked death into effect in me through that which is good in its effect, that through the commandment, sin might become exceedingly sinful. For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am of flesh, sold into slavery to sin."**

Paul uses the two terms, flesh and spirit. Spirit, that which comes from having the Holy Spirit within and the Holy Spirit's working, and everything else is flesh, that which we had before we received the Holy Spirit, which we still have. And it's really important that we still have it.

It's the question of why, when we turn to Christ, doesn't the Lord just take care of it and make me righteous in practice immediately? That's what I want. Why do we go through all this? We think the reason why we go through this is it's really important in getting to know the Lord and to know ourselves as new creatures in Christ that we be in the position where, once we have the Spirit, we now have the ability to choose between what comes naturally, which includes a lot of desire to do the kinds of things the law says. We're rebellious naturally, but we're not stupid.

Unbelieving society does come up with a lot of the things that God commands in Scripture, but not all, and reacts against ones, especially when they're presented as law, and particularly as divine law.

It's imperative now that we have the Spirit, now that we have the ability to respond positively to God's Word with the aid of the Holy Spirit residing in my heart, the seat of motivation, the seat of my essential will, that now that I have the choice of responding to God by the Spirit or continuing to do what comes naturally, what I've been doing all my life up until then, which includes, as I just said, obeying God in some things because I decided those were what I wanted anyway.

I'm not doing it because God says it, but I'm doing it because it's what I want. In fact, that's what God wants us to do when Paul has as his objective in ministry bringing about the obedience of faith, not obedience of the faith, not obedience to the faith, but the obedience of faith, meaning how it is that we obey because we trust that this is really what we want, is because we have embraced it as our will. It's not just God's will. It's my will.

The beauty of that is the result of that is that we get to do our will, God's and mine. And if it's our will and there is not a distinction between my will and God's will, there's no issue. And there's unity and harmony and cooperation.

**"We know that the law is spiritual, but I am of flesh, sold into bondage to sin."** When Paul is using the term spiritual as opposed to the spirit, as opposed to flesh, spiritual as opposed to fleshly, that's what he's referring to. And he says, I know the law is spiritual. It is of God and is to accomplish His purposes, but I'm a flesh which reacts because the flesh is sold into slavery to sin. The flesh reacts because of the activity, the dynamic of sin within.

Now Paul has a dilemma that he has to figure out. Verse 15: **I do not understand what I am working into effect, for I do not practice what I will, but I produce that which I hate.** I will to practice something, but that's not what happens, and the result that I produce is something that I hate. It's contrary to my will.

I set out with a purpose to work something into effect, and I will to do something expecting a particular effect, and I run into two problems. One is I wind up not doing what I've set my will to do, and the other is I get results that I didn't anticipate and I don't want. It's not my will to get this outcome. It's not my will to do the thing that I do.

Now he says, what do I do, given this dichotomy within me and how confusing it is? I don't understand, he says. But if I produce that which I do not will to produce, I agree with the law that it is ideally good.

This is 1 John 1:9: confessing my sin, acknowledging to God in prayer that what I'm doing is not, I know it's not what He wants. But then there are people who first John 1:9 their way through life. They think all they have to do is tell God, yeah, I know I blew it, and that's the end of it. It's not, because God wants us to do something about the problem. He wants us to fix the problem. He wants to fix the problem in us, but He needs our permission and cooperation to do it.

The conclusion is no longer am I myself working it into effect. I will to work something into effect. I will to practice what I believe will work it into effect. And I will to produce a given outcome, but that doesn't happen. Paul says there's a disconnect, and the disconnect is in what is being worked into effect.

**No longer am I myself working it into effect** because that's not what I will to do, and I'm capable of doing it in my human abilities, **but sin which dwells in me.** My objective is getting hijacked along the way. What I'm doing is sabotage. What I'm practicing is sabotage. What I'm producing is sabotage. There's some sort of corrupting influence in the works here.

I may have completely agreed with the Lord. His calling is to learn to love. But what keeps coming out is anger and just the opposite, condemnation, anger. And I may have gone to the Lord and say, Lord, I hate this. I don't want to be doing this. I renounce this. I welcome instead Your calling to love. And then out it comes again.

It should be a blessing to people, which always is when it's the real thing. But instead, if I find myself getting angry, it does not bless people. It hurts them. And I'm producing the very thing I hate.

There's something that's corrupting it, and this corrupting agent at work is sin. The dynamic is sin. Verse 18 says, **I know that nothing good in its effect dwells in me.** That is in my flesh, my natural constitution. **For the willing is present in me.**

Now, this is not passive "willing". As in, "Oh, I'm willing to put up with this thing." It's talking about what I am actively exercising my will to do. That is happening! I succeed as far as determining my will. But the working into effect of that which is ideally good, which is what I desire to work into effect, is not.

I'm not producing that which is good in its effect that I will to produce. I am practicing the very evil that I do not will. But if I am producing that which I do not will, no longer am I the one working it into effect with sin which dwells in me.

Sabotage is happening, and sin is the sabotaging element because we're talking about willing to be exercising my will to obey God, to do what God commands. And what keeps me from doing this is this dynamic that refuses to obey anybody else.

Verse 21: **I thus discover the law that evil is present in me.** Now, a lot of translations at this point will say the principle, but Paul uses the word law. He could say principle, but he says law because He's emphasizing that this is the way it is, period. Not just some of the time, not just partially, but this is it.

**Evil dwells in me, the one who wills to produce that which is ideally good.** If I'm wanting to produce that which is ideally good, work it into effect, then what's sabotaging it is evil. If it weren't, it would be good, and it wouldn't disrupt anything.

**For I delight in the law of God in the inner man, but I see a different law in my members fighting against the law of my mind and taking me captive to the law of sin which is in my members.** He has just referred to three laws that are in conflict. I see a different law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind.

Two things that are the way they are always, no exceptions. And actually, there are only two laws here involved, because this different law, fighting against the law of my mind, is the law of sin, as he says in the conclusion.

There is the law of my mind. My mind is made up. My mind is set. My will is set. When he says the law of my mind, he's talking about the way the mind always functions. When he has determined his will, then his mind is operating in accordance with that, seeking to make it happen. That's the way the mind works.

The mind is what enables us to proceed and to analyze and exercise discernment, make choices that would seem to the best of our ability to be things that will be effective in pursuing the objective that we have determined with our will, we are striving to make happen.

I am seeking to do that, to practice that which will produce the end result, which is that which is ideally good, as God declares in His word. And yet, I can't make it happen. I get ambushed along the way by the law of sin, which then takes me captive. And when you're taken captive, you can't go freely down the road you were intent on going down. This is what is happening.

He utters a cry of despair: **"Wretched man that I am, who will rescue me from this body of death?"** Or it could be translated, "This embodiment of death." But I think he's referring to the fact that this body is indwelt by sin, which fact results in death. It puts an end to my efforts to obey God.

Then, amazingly, he says, **"Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord."** He's just been talking on and on and analyzing and figuring out why he can't accomplish, he can't work into effect, what he sets out to do, which is what God's word declares is ideally good. And he says, "Thanks be to God."

For what?

**"Then, on the one hand, I myself with the mind am serving the law of God."** This is something new. Step one: with my will, I accept, embrace God's calling as my purpose. That was not the mind. That was from the heart. Now I am obeying with my mind, just not with my body. **But on the other hand**, he says, **with the flesh also, the law of sin.**

Basically, what he's discovered is he can obey God on the mental level. With his conscious will, the heart will is the objective. Now with his conscious will, which focuses on individual moments, opportunities, temptations, frustration, whatever. He says, now my mind is on the side, is acting on God's side, not just my will, but now also my mind, which was not.

And in Romans, especially Romans 3, Paul analyzes the way the fallen human mind, the natural human mind operates. And it is anything but serving the law of God. We've made this progress. The problem is I can obey God now, not just with my will, but I can obey God consciously. But I can't make my body obey me and actually do, in practice, what I have determined in my heart and with my mind to do, to practice, to work into effect, depending on what we are talking about, the activity or the result.

And I can't make my body do either one. And of course, what we are saying: I can't do it consistently. I can do it. And it's like the New Year's resolution. I've determined to practice something and to bring about some outcome, some effect.

Most New Year's resolutions are, in fact, carried out at least once towards the very beginning of the year, maybe twice, maybe 10 times, maybe for a week or two weeks. But as is commonly stated, the conclusion is New Year's resolutions are made to be broken. Promises are made to be broken, which is the sad reality of the way life proceeds in a fallen world, apart from God's redeeming work.

Just to discuss this a little bit, it's been raining hard here, and there's an analogy that a friend of ours came up with that we found very helpful, and that is of a water puddle after rain. And it can look beautiful. It can reflect the big puffed up clouds and trees. I've taken some pretty amazing pictures in the last few days with big puddles that were good because of my phone, which has such a good camera in it.

I saw what a beautiful reflection. Clear. It looks like it's clear and beautiful. And then I saw on my walk a little boy who had a stick and was doing what we all enjoyed doing when we were little. And that is using the stick to stir up the puddle that looked like this gorgeous mirror of the sky. This pure mirror. Pure, clean.

And as he rotated his stick and moved it back and forth, it became full of mud. And it wasn't that the stick introduced the mud. The mud was already there at the bottom. The stick stirred it up. He brought it up to where it was visible.

And that's the analogy that, as Paul is discussing, what on earth is going on in us? Here we will to do what the Lord wants us to do. I really want to. I've committed myself to it and want to with everything I've got. And then I don't do it. And why?

And he's identified that as soon as there's law, "I will never get angry again," that it brings up the rebellion of the flesh that you can't, no one tells me what to do, at least overall. Sooner or later, I have to prove to myself at least that I don't have to do what I'm ordered to do.

And he has said the law of the Lord is holy, righteous, and good. That is good living. It's wise living. Then why don't I choose to follow it? I want to. But as soon as I'm viewing it as law, there's this other dynamic that comes up of no one tells me what to do, even me.

And all of us have experienced this. We used to serve on prayer team at one of the churches we are involved with, and a lady came up who, her job was to do seminars, equipping seminars for executives of different companies here in the Bay Area. And she was in despair. She said she had set up, she had one of these big seminars coming up really soon, and she had set up her preparation times, and then she found that she couldn't do it. It was getting closer and closer, and she still had not done the preparation. She had done everything else, and she was in despair. She didn't understand what's going on in me. I want to do this, but I can't seem to make myself prepare for it. And this is going to be terrible.

And Stanford students experience this often. They're going to take the GREs, or they're going to get ready for the quals for a PhD. Comprehensive exams. Everything, be examined on everything in your field. If you've been admitted to a PhD program in physics, you need to be able to answer any question about any aspect of physics: mechanics, light and heat, atomic nuclear physics, electricity, magnetism, anything. And you got a lot of reviewing to do because you need to show that you are really educated about these things.

Students will set up these perfect study programs. I'll spend a month on this and a month on that. And they've got it all planned out. I've got a year and a half or so to prepare. And then they find that months have gone by, half a year, a year, and it's coming up, and they still have practically not touched it. And it's frightening. And what's going on? And they think maybe they've gotten lazy or something, but Paul identifies it's this rebellion that is in every one of us that we get to learn to recognize and to take charge of by the Spirit.

And as he said, the law triggers this reaction that's in every human being. And I've experienced it for sure, when I may be exhausted and Steve suggests it's time for bed. And immediately I'm have all the to-do's to finish before I feel free to go to bed. I'm going to neaten things up, make sure that it's all set for the morning so it's beautiful, send a text to somebody who's probably already in bed, finish some texts that I had intended to do and felt pressure to do and some emails, and pretty soon two hours has gone by and I'm exhausted. We all do it. This won't take any time at all, so I'll do it. Hours later.

And my preparation for teaching class used to be this way. I've learned to get charge of it now by the Spirit. We would prepare. I'd go out to study, and Erica would be in here where we're sitting now working on it. I'd come in after an hour, and Erica was doing other things. You know, get the laundry going.

It'd be much easier to prepare when I don't have the baskets of laundry on my mind. And besides, it's good to get up and do something. This could go on for hours. I would be like a dog circling 10, 15 times before settling down. And I couldn't understand what was going on.

This is exactly what Paul is analyzing here. Why diets? You may succeed. You have decided it yourself, and you're on it, and you're succeeding. And then by Friday, you've got to celebrate because you've done so well.

Somewhere in the basement, there's a piece of paper. When I was training and competing as a distance runner, I got interested at one point in how much, objectively, I could eat in order to maintain competition weight. Distance runners don't do as well when they're carrying five pounds unnecessary around a six-mile course, or however long. I thought, out of curiosity, I'm just going to log my caloric intake and see how much I need. It was really just out of curiosity.

I did a bar chart and turned the paper, landscape orientation, using grid paper. It was easy to do that, and each day there was a bar. They were around the same. There was some fluctuation, generally not a lot of big variation. Every once in a while, there'd be a special occasion and I'd eat more. Then I started holding back some and there came a day where the bar went all the way from the bottom of the page to the top and continued halfway down the other side of the sheet of paper. It was several times as much as I'd ever eaten any other day.

It was this reaction. Just my wanting to keep track of this for information let it become subtly some sort of a requirement to control this. And all of a sudden, I absolutely couldn't help violating it.

Okay, so I've eaten a little more. I've eaten more than I usually eat. I've eaten more than I've eaten any day while I was logging this. And I couldn't stop.

We all recognize this. It's helpful to know what it is.
And why is this even in here? Well, Paul is letting us know that just knowing the right thing isn't enough. Even being determined to do the right thing isn't enough.

That's helpful for compassion with one another. Maybe you're in a relationship, you're married or whatever, and you really would like the other to stop getting angry. And they are praying. They're determined not to get angry. And then it happens again. It's easy to say, wait a minute, what happened? And really put on law. And that leads to more anger.

Realizing that it isn't law that will lead to success. It doesn't mean that the standards don't matter. The law is holy and righteous and good. But it takes learning how to recognize this dynamic in each of us, and it's true no matter what it is, destructive or just annoying. Trying to get someone else to comply with my preference, as soon as it becomes an expectation, runs the risk of triggering the reaction that is the characteristic of sin.

Our education-loving society says all we need to do is educate and then we won't have a problem. But we know that that's not the case. A gal in her 20s who really got into alcohol and drugs, she said, all the education didn't matter because you figure I'll be the exception. I can handle it. I'll be the exception. This won't trash me.

It's not saying, then why try? That's not Paul's conclusion. What he's concluding is, and how this objective view of what's going on in each of us is really helpful, is saying not everything that comes from within me is me. I am the new creation. I have joined the Lord. There I have the Holy Spirit within. I recognize Jesus as my loving husband that I want to go with, to join with, to cooperate with.

But there is something else that comes from within, which is not me. It's the old habits, the old ways of thinking, and to learn to differentiate between those two. And we'll really get into it next week. How do I take charge of this through the Spirit? It takes active working with the Spirit to take charge of these areas of the flesh.

Here he's saying, I can make a lot of progress. Not only from the heart and from my mind, I want to do it the Lord's way, but I have to learn how to do it depending on the Spirit, which is what we'll get into next week in Romans 8.

But the objective viewpoint of recognizing God, there are strong urges that come from within me that is not me. And as I learned to recognize those patterns, I'm set up to learn to reign over them instead of letting them control me.

Back to Romans 7:6: **"that we've been released from the law, having died to that by which we were bound so that we serve in newness of the Spirit, not oldness of the letter."**

We've looked tonight at why serving in oldness of the letter does not work, which is important to recognize. But then the serving in newness of the Spirit, that's what we get into next week as we go into the beginning of Romans 8.

And the key: I'm not under law. I'm under the headship of my loving spiritual husband. And my motivation for obeying is not that it's required, it's that I'm eager to partner with Him and cooperate with Him in His agenda, in His fulfilling His calling, which is what? To sanctify me, to lead me into fulfilling what He designed and created me.

Remember, Jesus is the member of the Godhead who did the work of creation. We're told that several places. We're told that in the beginning of John's Gospel, we're told that in Colossians 2. Towards the end of chapter 1. And He is the agent of creation. He is the one who designed me the way I'm designed and created me accordingly. And He is the one I look to to guide me into fulfilling all of that potential and entering into really intimate knowledge of Him and our heavenly Father.

As I keep my attention on Him and not on what I'm to do or not do, but yes, onto what I'm called to do or not do, but with reference to Him rather than with reference to rules. I avoid the bugaboo of the flesh, but I then need to act responsibly and cooperatively with and by the Spirit. Which we'll get into next week with Romans 8.

Let's pray.

> Lord Jesus, thank You that You give us insight into You who see us see all things, insight that we wouldn't have otherwise. We would be left in that despair of, "Wretched man that I am, who will set me free from the body of this death?"

> I want to do the right thing. I'm trying to do the right thing, and I can't seem to.

> Lord, thank You for those points of despair that we've all hit because it's an invitation for more, an invitation to learn, to take, to recognize what is in each of us that is not from the Spirit that has caused so much frustration and despair and anger and just lovelessness within each of us, and to learn to recognize it and learn how to take charge of it by Your Spirit so that we do go hard and will and in action with You and can be powerful parts of Your work in this broken world.

> Thank You, Lord, for all the ways in which all of us are doing that. Please deepen that even more. May we learn to discern: What is coming from within? Is it the Spirit, or is it the flesh? And take charge of it instead of just rolling with whatever I feel.

> Thank You, Lord, that we don't have to just react, that we can move forward with You. In Your name, amen.