> Lord Jesus, thank you so much for this opportunity to spend time in Your word and for the season just last week of Thanksgiving, a special season set aside to gain perspective and to see all that You have done in our life in the past year, in the lives of those who we spent Thanksgiving with, and Lord, to really recognize You and recognize Your hand in our lives, even in places where we might not have been very aware of it.
>
> Lord, we thank You for just how healing that is and how good it is and the blessing of that. And Lord, we thank You for this quarter where we have been studying and learning the calling and the equipping for biblical counseling and in the last several weeks really focusing in on how You call us to persevere in faith.
>
> Lord, thank You for that calling, even though it is not easy. Thank You that You are building Your character in each one of us and that You are leading us in Your love and that we get to know You more and more as we trust You.
>
> Lord, thank You for that sweet gift of getting to know You in the challenging things as well as in the joyful times, the naturally joyful times. Lord, we ask that You would guide our time tonight and that it would be a time of just being encouraged in You and all that You encourage us in, as well as just getting a clearer picture of our calling and our opportunity to grow and to obtain a testimony, not just for our own growth, but to have something to share with others, that others might be encouraged and might grow and might take hold of more and more real life, their promised inheritance in You.
>
> So Lord, we are so thankful for each one here and we ask that You will guide the time in Your name. Amen.

Welcome everyone.

Today, we will do a quick overview of all that we have been through this quarter and then do a quick session looking at six passages where the Lord is encouraging us and exhorting us to not lose heart because that is so easy to do. Especially as we get in view the enormity, the challenge, and the opportunity of the Lord's calling for each of us in our life of faith.

To start overviewing where we have been so far, I want to start in Joshua. We started in Joshua one, but we actually spent a bit of time reading a bit ahead and looking to Joshua's leading Israel across the Jordan. I found the classes on Joshua really helpful because, even in recent days, friends have asked me why are you still involved in Parakaleo after so many years? What is it about that ministry?

And I found it hard to give a crisp answer. I would say that the Lord has drawn me towards encouragement and towards His Word—not only its beauty and its depth, but its practical application and how it's His instruction for life. But I think the picture we get from Joshua really helped illustrate and solidify that a lot more.

### Joshua 1: a picture of the biblical counseling ministry

So let's start with a comparison of the ministry of Moses and the ministry of Joshua because this was really eye-opening for me.

Joshua 1 starts with, **"It came about after the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, that the Lord spoke to Joshua, the son of Nun, Moses' servant, saying, 'Now, therefore, arise, cross this Jordan, you and all this people, to the land which I am giving them, to the sons of Israel.'"**

In a way, you can't really understand the ministry of Joshua without starting with the ministry of Moses.

So what is Moses' ministry?

Moses is calling people out of the land of slavery.

Joshua is leading people into their inheritance and to the land of promise.

One is calling out, and the other is leading in.

So Moses' ministry corresponds to that of an evangelist,
and Joshua's that of a discipler or counselor.

Another difference is that in the ministry of Moses, the enemies are behind them.

What is the impetus to take that leap of faith, to cross through the waters, to go through the unknown? Paul talks about being baptized right into the Red Sea. It's being identified with the death of entering into the waters and then with coming out in new life.

So what is the impetus to do that? It takes a lot of guts and a lot of faith and trust to do that.

For Moses, it's the enemies behind you! In a way, you are compelled. If you don't go, you're going to die. So you might as well go.

But in the case of Joshua, what's the impetus? In particular, the enemy is in front of you! The challenge is on the other side of the water.

The impetus to go in this case is that we're trusting the Lord—that the inheritance He promised is actually that good. Even though there's opposition, we're still going to cross this Jordan and meet the enemies on the other side.

Another distinction is what happens after.

After they crossed through the Red Sea, Moses has a song of praise to the Lord, and it's a wonderful song. But after they crossed through the Jordan, Joshua commands each of the heads of the tribes to collect one of the stones from the river bed—to gather memorial stones and arrange them on the other side of the Jordan, that it would be a testimony for all generations to come.

So crossing the Jordan resulted in a visible testimony that many can see and witness for generations and generations to come.

It's that which is won by faith as we're trusting the Lord, to really enter into His promise.

This is the character that we see of seasoned saints of any age around us as they persevere and triumph by faith.

It causes people to ask questions: How was so-and-so able to respond in that way? How was so-and-so able to persevere or be joyful or not lose their temper?

Another distinction in crossing the Red Sea vs. the Jordan is that the narrator really wants to make it clear that they pass through on dry land. It says it three times: on dry land, on dry land, on dry land.

And so Moses lifts his hands in prayer and the sea opens and it becomes dry land, which is, of course, supernatural. The Israelites, according to the text, did not slosh through the mud. They walked through on dry land.

Whereas for crossing the Jordan, the priests that were carrying the ark, that were leading the people through, had to step in the water. It is a greater degree of trust, saying, "Lord, we are trusting You for this, and we trust that You are going to fulfill Your promise, and we will trust before we see it happen. We are going to go and dip our feet in the water and then we'll see what You do."

As you step through, responding to the Lord in faith, then the way is prepared for you.

I found all these distinctions really helpful to understand.

And lastly, their names. Moses' name means "drawn out" and his ministry corresponds to drawing people out of slavery to sin and alerting them that what they're living and experiencing at the moment really isn't abundant life. It's not the real thing.

And the Israelites recognized that. They recognized that they were toiling. They recognized that they were suffering. Moses was able to give people hope for more and for better and then to lead them out of that.

But Moses in his ministry is only able to lead them to the threshold of the Jordan and he is unable to lead them further. Then it's the ministry of Joshua, or Jesus, or the Lord saves, to lead them through the Jordan and into the land of promise.

And to round out the picture, I really appreciated in Joshua 3, the discussion of the Jordan being the descending river. Jordan means descent. Joshua 3 says the river stopped its flow from Adam. So the descent (Jordan) from natural man (Adam) into death (the dead sea) was interrupted, so that Joshua (Jesus) could lead the people through into their inheritance.

So quite a picture that we have here. And of course, Jesus went through the passion and the cross in order to open up the door to the promised land and lead us to take possession of it.

I think that is our calling in biblical counseling: to encourage and lead others into taking hold of what Christ died to give us. That was really helpful for me. Of course, we're all called to do both evangelism and discipleship. But the particular calling for the counseling ministry is to encourage people who already know the Lord and have given their life to Him overall.

It is saying, "Yes, you do have your eternal destiny. But how can we encourage you to grow into the beautiful and strong character of the Lord and experience life with Him more fully here and now?"

So that is what I took away from Joshua as our calling for biblical counseling.

Now that we have the calling in view, let's look a little bit about how we're equipped for this ministry.

**Equipped for biblical counseling: keeping God's word to do it**

For that, we looked at Ezra 7:10 and Isaiah 50.

Ezra 7:10: **"For Ezra had set his heart to study the law of the Lord, and to practice it, and to teach His statutes and ordinances in Israel."**

It starts with Ezra's motivation and determination. He set his heart. What is his commitment? I like to think of it as what gets him out of bed in the morning. It's not just "my alarm happened to be going off". It's "what am I committed to? What gives me the sense of really moving forward in this life?" For Ezra, it's in walking with the Lord through these three elements: to study the law of the Lord, to practice it, and to teach His statutes and ordinances in Israel.

We talked about the law of the Lord, the law being the absolutes that the Lord has revealed for life. The One who created us and designed us and knows good from evil just by looking at it. He is the One who knows what decisions lead to life and flourishing and deeper relationship with Him and with others, as well as what creates separation with the Lord and with others. He has revealed that to us in His word. That's the law of the Lord.

Then we focused on how he didn't just jump straight to teaching it, but his commitment is to do it, to benefit from it himself. In the class last night, the students were saying, "sometimes I feel disqualified. I don't feel ready to teach because I haven't learned how to do it enough! Am I only qualified or allowed to teach the things that I've already fully put into practice?" That is a good question.

It would be hard to demand that I have to learn how to walk this out perfectly in order to be able to teach it, because then other than Jesus, none of us would be able to teach much from God's word! But the point of the text is that I am not just trying to teach other people things that I'm not willing to benefit from myself. It's not about false advertising: promoting something that I'm not willing to partake in. Instead it's "I'm fully convinced that, Lord, whatever You say is truly life. And I want to apply and benefit from this as much as I can!"

Steve had a fun quip: some people say, "God said it and I believe it. So it's settled." But that's the wrong order! It's "God said it, so it's settled. Then I believe it." It's that commitment to "Lord, whatever You say, that is truth and that is real life."

And Lord, whatever You say, I trust You and I'm learning to live and think and act accordingly in practice. That is the commitment Ezra has here.

We talked briefly about statutes and ordinances: what's the difference? The statutes are the functional logistics of how to live wisely and successfully. The ordinances are about how to live in relation to others. It's closer to something like case law: what happens when someone's cow escapes and tramples all over your field or eats all your vegetables? And we've looked at a lot of both in our studies. Statues: here's how you live wisely in relation to the Lord and grow in Him. Ordinances: the Lord knows that after the fall life is messy so He gives us wisdom for how to deal redemptively and wisely in messy relationships.

Most of the prior years of the teaching have focused on the statutes and ordinances. For the statutes, consider Romans: how do I change and grow in the Lord in practice? Or in Philippians, how do I have joy in the midst of tribulation? And for the ordinances: we've looked at male-female relationships, and wisdom for relating to believers and unbelievers.

But this quarter we started zeroing in on the dynamics of the life of faith, and what it takes to inherit the promises that the Lord has given us.

Then we jumped to Isaiah 50. Isaiah 50 is voiced by the servant. It doesn't have exactly the same prefix as the rest of the servant songs where it says, "Behold, my servant." But I think many folks would consider this the third servant song.

Isaiah 50 is prophetically giving a voice to our Lord, to Jesus, and it is what He says about His own training. Isaiah 50:4-5

**"The Lord God has given me the tongue of disciples that I may know how to sustain the weary one with the word. He awakens me morning by morning. He awakens my ear to listen as a disciple. The Lord God has opened my ear and I was not disobedient, nor did I turn back."**

We discussed the servant's concern: how to sustain the weary one with a word.

I think we've all been in situations or have ourselves been in situations where the circumstances are just way too big—way too big for us personally or way too big when someone else shares it with us. The question is, how do we get the words to share? How do we have the heart of compassion and the listening ear, the wisdom to actually respond to someone who is in deep pain and deep hurt or in deep weariness? And here it says, the servant learned from His Lord, he learned from the Father. The Lord God has given me the tongue of learners. The encouragement that the Lord gives us is the encouragement that He also received from our Father. And it is for that purpose: to sustain the weary one with the word.

And then we looked at the Servant's training program. He awakens me morning by morning. He awakens my ear to listen as a disciple. I think this is wonderful. This evokes a picture of the Father attentively tending to each of us disciples, each learner. And it's the Lord Himself who awakens us morning by morning. Are we available and are we ready to respond?

He is designing a curriculum to teach us. And we discussed how it's just so valuable to get that perspective from the Lord in the morning; to start the day with Him as our reference point so that as we're going through the day and as we're encountering all these inputs—what seems to be coming from within or what comes from others, or from our environment—we have the Lord very much in the picture.

As Isaiah 50 continues, we'll see how critically important it is to the servant that this is where his focus is. Because it says, **"The Lord God has opened my ear and I was not disobedient, nor did I turn back."** What was he not disobedient to? What was the command?

**"I gave my back to those who strike me, and my cheeks to those who pluck out the beard. I did not cover my face from humiliation and spitting. For the Lord God helps me. Therefore I am not disgraced. Therefore I have set my face like flint, and I know that I will not be ashamed. He who vindicates me is near. Who will contend with me? Let us stand up to each other. Who has a case against me? Let him draw near to me. Behold, the Lord God helps me. Who is he who condemns me? Behold, they will all wear out like a garment. The moth will eat them."**

The Lord is called to rejection and shame and being declared not the bringer of salvation, but to be the problem. And of course, all these things described here happened: "I gave my back to those who strike me, my cheeks to those who pluck out the beard, did not cover my face from humiliation and spitting."

But what is His awareness? He says twice, "The Lord God helps me," at the beginning of verse seven and at the beginning of verse nine. What He is aware of in the midst of this fierce opposition, violence, and torture, is that the Lord is very much there in the midst with Him. So He is able to say these amazing things: "Therefore, I am not disgraced." Well, he’s being spit on and he's being abandoned by His disciples. But He sees a greater reality.

Then there are a series of questions: **Who will contend with Me? Let us stand up to each other.** Well in a sense you can answer that question very easily. There are a lot of people contending with Him. But the question is, what’s behind this contention? And will it stand? Will it succeed?

And it's impossible for any of us, even in the comparatively minor trials that we go through, to see that unless we, by faith, choose to make the Lord our reference point and our focus, because life is just too big otherwise. It’s far too easy to be overwhelmed with everything that we’re facing.

Then in verses 10 and 11, there’s an interesting exhortation. If you will, in verses 4 through 9 it’s like the camera of the narrator is on the servant, on Jesus. But then in verses 10 and 11, the camera turns and points toward us.

It says, **"Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of His servant, that walks in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the name of the Lord and rely on His God."** Then verse 11, **"Behold, all you who kindle a fire, who encircle yourselves with firebrands, walk in the light of your fire, and among the brands you have set ablaze. This you will have from My hand, you will lie down in torment."**

It turns into a question and an exhortation, and it's directed at us, the listeners. You’ll notice in both cases, they’re both in darkness. In verse 10, these are the people that walk in darkness and have no light. In verse 11, they have no light. That’s why they’re using firebrands as makeshift torches.

And so there's a call to two types of people that are both in darkness, but their approach to the darkness is quite different. In verse 10, it’s those who fear the Lord that obey the voice of His servant. And what's the exhortation? Keep trusting the name of the Lord and rely on our God.

It’s an acknowledgement that for us who are trusting the Lord and walking in faith, there will be seasons where we’re walking in darkness and we don’t know where we’re going or it doesn’t seem clear to us. There is One who goes with us, but we don’t know where we’re headed. The exhortation here, as we look at the servant who is going through all that He’s going through in the previous verses, is to likewise trust in the name of the Lord and rely on our God. And then the warning to the other group. These are the people who are in the darkness, but they kindle a fire. And I think in the Hebrew, it literally says they gird themselves with firebrands. If you imagine sticking a torch into your garments... pretty dangerous! If you stick the torch in your garments, your hands are free, but be careful because sooner rather than later that you are going to get burned.

And that's the exhortation that Isaiah 50 ends with.

So to bring it back, this is the method of equipping for biblical counseling. We respond to the Lord morning by morning, making Him our reference point for the things we are going through in life in order that we would learn how to practice all that He has called us to because it's life, and it's preparation to share with others.

We can often see that in the lives of others who have walked a bit further along than us and see the fruit that has come out. Hebrews 12:11 says, "Not all training seems for the moment joyful, but painful. But afterwards, for those who have been trained by it, yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness."