> Oh, Lord, thank you for your mercies, which are new every morning. "Great is your faithfulness." Thank you for your long patience with all of us, reaching in in so many ways to woo our hearts and our ears open to you, so that you can bless us abundantly. Thank you that that's your heart. And thank you for each one here known and loved by you and by us. And we're so thankful for each and every one. We ask, Lord God, that You'll open our ears to hear You tonight, both for ourselves and for helping others with discernment that You give us from Your word and by Your Spirit. Lord, keep lifting us up so that we glorify You. We bring Your presence to every place and every relationship that You have called us to. May we have the discernment from You and from Your word to come alongside, to be part of Your healing and delivering work and encouraging into maturity in You. Thank You, Lord, that we get to join You—or not begging You to join us—you are inviting us to join You—and we're so thankful. In Your name, amen.

Tonight, as if you read our little announcement, there are a number of very key questions that are asked and answered. Over the many years of ministry, we have been asked numbers of times, is it valid to apply Old Testament to us as believers in Jesus? There have been a lot of believers in Jesus who don't think that is true. You don't even read the Old Testament, but knew only.

The passage that we will be in tonight is one of a number that soundly answers that question. One of the questions is, can we—is it valid to apply Old Testament narrative to our lives, which are lived out thousands of years later, and where we have Jesus in our heart, and they did not? How were the examples cited and the principles stated helpful for discerning life choices today for us and for helping others?

As you know, as we've talked about, the Lord has created us with free will as part of the central part of being created in His image. We're constantly making decisions based on what we evaluate to be good. But how can I know what a choice will actually produce, both in the short term and especially the long term, and what my impact will be on those around me? I can't know that by sight or by logic. We've all tried it, or by feeling. We've all tried all those methods. We and others can easily end up hurting, enslaved to controlling habits, and confused about how we got here and what to do about it.

Here, I am a believer in Jesus, and why am I hurting so much? Why am I still not freely joyfully growing in Him? This passage contains a lot of wisdom of understanding the types of issues that can grab us without our realizing it, where we think we're choosing what's good and end up with damage to us and to others. It is actually a very rich and helpful passage.

Bring the meeting back up. Okay. I want to start reading with... All right. Everybody pray. Lord, please help all of this to work. Okay. I'm not sure why I'm still... Okay. Finally got you guys back. I want to start with our focus primarily in 1 Corinthians 10. I assume you got the handout that was attached to the announcement that went out an hour ago. The passage we're looking at really starts with 1 Corinthians 9:24. It helps set the objective that Paul has in this section. It is important we bear in mind what Paul's purpose is so we don't get caught up.

There was a concern last night about how we as Christians use passages from the Old Testament, how much of what we get there applies now. We need to look when a New Testament passage is quoting from the Old Testament as to why it's being quoted and what the New Testament writer tells us he desires us to do with that.

We start in 1 Corinthians 9:24.

**"Do you not know that all those who run in a race all run, but one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may win."**

At that time, there was one winner. The point is not that we're supposed to be trying to beat other people out and that there's only one person who's going to graduate to heaven after dying. The point is that there's only one way to succeed. The prize that he's referring to is that of entering into the appropriation of what God has promised to us and the blessings that go with it.

He says, "Run in such a way that you may win. Everyone who competes in the games exercises self-control in all things. They then receive a perishable wreath, we an imperishable."

I can resonate with the self-control needed to compete well. Running was my sport, still is. I'm still running, not like I used to. It's difficult at times to realize that I used to run three times this fast. You're running at 80. And four times this fast when I was competing in a race. It's hard to believe that anybody can do that. That was not spectacular performance.

What we're talking about is to receive an imperishable prize, something that will not corrupt, that will not die, that is forever. Big stakes, eternal stakes. Therefore, "I run in such a way as not without aim. If you're not focused on the goal, on the finish line, you're not going to run an effective race. I box in such a way as not beating the air," what we call shadow boxing today. "I buffet my body to make it my slave." Literally, "I bruised my body to make it my slave."

He is not referring to physical self-flagellation, as monks got into in the past. That was the time when there was confusion about what's the difference between the body and the flesh. Aren't they one and the same thing? But they're not. What Paul is recognizing here is the battle against the flesh, the sin that resides within our physical body, and that we need to control what takes place in our body so that we use our body to serve the Lord instead of being the captive of the opposition that is present in our body and will be as long as this body lives.

One thing I was thinking about is what the prize is. We get to reign in life. Paul uses that terminology in Romans. Not just the rulers out of Genesis 1 and the commission to rule, but reign. I get to reign over all that's in my head, in my words, my attitudes, my actions. I get to actually join with the Lord and show Him forth, glorify Him from within by the Holy Spirit.

And rule is management, but reign is sovereign rule. Management, having even life and death authority. And that is what we are to do: to exercise life and death control over what takes place in our body.

When I get to the end of my life and the Lord and I are reviewing my life, I really want Him to have joy, that my life wasn't wasted, that I made the choice, and of course not perfectly, and He doesn't expect that. Romans is very clear about that. But am I continuing to grow to give joy to Him, pleasing Him? Romans 12 talks about, "Well done, good and faithful servant." I want to look back with Him and know that my life was well lived.

Now Paul moves to what he's getting at. We're looking at this to get further insight into what we were looking at in Joshua 1, and we are coming back to Joshua 1 in a couple of weeks. We're not getting to our calling to lead others yet, but we're looking at what it is that Joshua was called to do, what leading the people from the wilderness into the promised land was all about, and are getting down to what's that about for us.

So, first of all, the everybody. 1 Corinthians 10:1

**"For I do not want you to be unaware, brethren, that our fathers were all under the cloud, all passed through the sea, all were baptized, that is, identified into Moses in the cloud and the sea."**

So that's the Exodus. And then in the wilderness. That's deliverance from slavery and the Lord's rescue of them and of us and giving them a new identity. Before, their identity was slaves who had no rights, and now our identity is rescued from all of that to get to know the Lord and show Him forth.

Now, what did they experience in the wilderness? "All ate the same spiritual food. All drank the same spiritual drink, for they were drinking from a spiritual rock which followed them, and the rock was Christ." I think he's using the term spiritual in this passage at this point to refer to the fact that these were not material things. These were not natural things. The food that they were given was a supernatural provision from God. The water to drink in the wilderness where thirst is a huge issue, and this rock, that water flowing out of rock, that there's a natural water flowing out of rock.

When I was about 15, I had to develop a spring on our property to provide water for our horses. I learned about that because it's a fun task. It's a privilege to get to do it. But it's also a careful task because if you don't do it quite right, you can actually plug up that natural outlet and not get water out of it again. SoI've done it. But what was different with this is that water flowed out of the rock. If you look behind the rock, you couldn't see where the water was flowing into the rock. Even if you looked under it, you wouldn't see.

And the other thing is, this rock was not just whatever rock they happened to find where they were. Paul tells us that this rock was traveling with them. This rock that gives abundant water, but you can't see where it's coming from. So this is supernatural.

What they were to learn was that God is providing for them supernaturally. They all had this common experience. What God was doing in the wilderness was providing for them, protecting them, which there were numerous instances with enemies trying to harm them, conquer them, but God allowed them to conquer and drive out the enemies.

They're learning to trust God because there is no natural provision and there isn't natural protection. They were able to defeat enemies in spite of the fact that none of them, except for Moses, were trained in warfare. The whole point of this was to learn who God is and to learn that He is a God who provides, protects in supernatural ways, that God's care for us is not limited by the natural circumstances, the natural provisions and all of that, so that we would know in the promised land that was promised that the Israelites would rule, and same is true for us, but it's not a physical land, is that we would expect God to do things for our well-being and for His glory that transcend the natural.

1 Corinthians 10:5, **"nevertheless, with most of them, God was not well pleased, for they were laid low in the wilderness."**

As you read Exodus, it's one big thing after another. No water is a big deal. No food is a big deal, especially with that huge number of people and children and animals. It's a big deal. Then being attacked from behind by the raiders, the Amalekites. It is one big thing after another. And I'm sure there are times in your life when you felt like it's one big thing after another. It seems to come that way. At times, health issues, all sorts of things, one right after the other, and things going on with kids and so on.

But as one or a couple of people trusted the Lord, they all saw the Lord. And that's true for us too. If in the face of one thing after another, huge things, even life stoppers, thank you, Lord. I trust you. Show me how to participate in this. I wouldn't have known to ask for it, but thank you that I am in the front row seat to see You at work. And so are others as they pray for me and we get to see You together. And we do.

It's just a little side note of how to go through those times, as we certainly have hit them in our lives.

And then Paul says, these things happened as examples for us. The question from last week: So what does this have to do with us? They're examples for us with what purpose? **"That we should not crave evil things as they also craved,"** and for good reason translations don't say "we should not lust after evil things as they lusted" because as we've just mentioned before lust immediately brings to mind sexual and this includes sexual definitely, but it's not exclusively such.

This is that they have compelling drive to pursue those things. And that means regarding these things as essential for life. And at the end of this passage, Paul will refer to that as idolatry, which it is. And idolatry consists of looking to something other than the Lord to provide life so that I'm successful in whatever term or fulfilled or whatever it is that I'm looking for.

What am I driven to do? Because I've decided that's where life is. And that's what the lust is. It's trying to fulfill what I have decided, whether consciously or not, I have to have for life to be good. Can't have for life to be good. And we'll get into that more.

Here he's bringing up the value of Old Testament narrative. Because what we have here, as opposed to our own lives, is we get to see the whole thing. We're in the midst of our lives. But with Old Testament and New Testament narratives, we see the whole life. And we see the choices that are made and where they go and what results.

And for us, we're in the midst. And so there's real value in being able to look at somebody else's life, not mine, with the choices made and where they go and what the Lord does and what He says about those choices. And we see that what He says is actually fulfilled. So that's the huge benefit of biblical narrative.

One of my favorite places is Second Chronicles, because you see good kings who are following the Lord and evil kings who are following all the pagan idols. And you see the results. You get to see the whole life and where it goes. So it's a huge benefit to us. And actually, Paul brings in the issue of idolatry right at this point. **"Do not be idolaters, as some of them were."** An idolater is someone who worships an idol. The essence of an idol is not a physical representation. We saw plenty of physical idols when we were in Israel, statues people made. We have them right in this neighborhood. Either as representations to try to make people think about what that represents, or then people worshiping the object itself as itself being able to give life.

The question is, where are you looking for life? **"Do not be idolaters, as some of them were," as it's written, "the people sat down to eat and drink and stood up to play."** This is a reference to the sin of the golden calf. What was that about? How did it come about? Where did they get it? This one was not that somebody else brought this in or something. The Israelites did it themselves.

"We don't know what happened to this Moses guy. It's been a month and we got to do something about it. So make a God for us." But where do they get the idea you need to make a God? Make a physical God. And where did they get the idea to make a bull calf? They brought this in with them from their experience to date.

That is one of the places that we get off, that the adversary leads us astray. We already have ideas that come to us from our family heritage, from our culture, our society. There's a Chinese saying, "If you want to know what water is, don't ask a fish." Because what we've grown up with is just the way it's done.

We may have told you about our middle daughter's first Christmas after getting married: she saved pennies and bought a fresh crab to make a very special dinner for them. That was a rare treat. She did all this to delight her husband. No children yet. He walked in, took one look and said, "What? No pizza?" In his family, Christmas Eve dinner was pizza. They spent the evening making pizza, gingerbread houses, and decorating Christmas cookies. That was what he expected. He didn't realize that was their family's thing. It was a wonderful thing, and we've done it with them since. But that it was the "right" thing to do. That's life.

The sense here is, what do you do when the person who is leading you is gone? You need a God. Gods are things you make. This is one way, because these examples that Paul is bringing up, each one, by looking at them carefully, we see that each one has to do with an effort to sabotage God's leading of the people into the promised land. And these things are a big deal because every one of these ones affected the whole crowd. It really was a crowd. It affected the whole people. These weren't just individual things. Part of the question that came up in class: no, we are not to take this as what happens to us as individuals as Christians.

It is helpful to know that the bull calf was worshipped in Egypt and throughout the Middle East at that point. Many of the Middle Eastern gods from that time had the bull calf as a symbol, because he could have anyone he wanted. He was the one in control. He was the one that supplied fertility—babies for us, agriculture, babies for our animals.

Quite conveniently, it became widespread that, "gee, the only way things are going to go well for us is if we just have wild, unlimited sex."

There is some real humor in the description of Aaron just when he's caught because he was the one that did it, saying, "Well, I just collected all this gold and I tossed it into the fire and out popped this bull." Amazing.

The point here, as Steve was saying, is the temptation that Paul's getting at. These have always been there: the temptation of idols, idolatry from our past. What did my family or my culture tell me I needed to do or to be to be successful or not do to be successful or not be? A lot of times those things are such a given that we don't even know they're there. We're just driven by it.

Why does this matter so much to me? I counseled doctors, very successful, even Nobel laureates dying at Stanford Hospital. They were looking back over their lives with deep regret that they had blown through their marriages and families because the thing that mattered was the Nobel Prize and all of the notoriety that went with it, or just the admiration and respect and appreciation that doctors get.

They didn't necessarily go through a series of marriages, but regretted having neglected their spouses and children as much as they had. They were dying alone. They were having the chance to look back and think over the choices that they'd made. But here we're getting to look ahead because we're looking at other people's lives. What were the choices and what was the results? And here they were following the idolatry of where they'd come from. The Lord had rescued them physically but their hearts hadn't changed. Remember it pushed them out of Egypt. I don't know why all our translations want to say "let my people go," but the Hebrew says "send my people away," and they don't leave until Pharaoh throws them out. They didn't leave as an act of rebellion against Pharaoh. They simply let the Lord show that He was superior to all the Egyptian gods.

And to the point where Pharaoh said, you know, I don't care how much work you've done for us. You won't do it for us after you leave. This place is destroyed. His advisors were saying, "Don't you see that the land of Egypt is destroyed? Get these people and their God out of here."

Now we come to verse 8, **"Nor let us act immorally as some of them did," and this is sexual immorality, and 23,000 fell in one day."** Now, this is the Israelites being seduced by Moab. Now, Balaam was hired to curse the Israelites. But each time he stepped up to curse, Balaam kept telling Balak "I can't say anything that the Lord doesn't give me to say." So he winds up blessing Israel. And Balak keeps taking Balaam to a place where there's probably a better vantage point from which to curse Israel. But he keeps blessing. And then finally, he says, "Okay, let's go to a place where all you can see is a tiny corner of these people clustered down there. You're kind of looking at his tail end of the procession, so it won't seem so overwhelming." And this time, he curses Moab. And you can guess, but Balaam does not get his paycheck. He has to flee for his life. So that seems to have taken care of that problem. But then what happens immediately afterwards? Balaam prompts Moabite women to entice Israelite men to come and join their parties, their sex orgies. A lot of Israelites join in the party and join themselves to the god. It says not only did they participate, but they also joined in worshiping the false god. This is actually at the foot of the last mountain where Balaam is prophesying over the Israelites and blesses them. The Israelite people are still there where they were when that took place, and Balaam still wants his reward, so he says, "I have another plan: send in the women and seduce the Israelite men."

And what Erica just said is what we can infer from the text. The text does not say that that's what happened directly. Elsewhere it says that he introduced them. So the Lord had to act. Now, all of these things in comparison to our situation here: these were all major events with the nation of Israel. The spiritual adversary of the Lord and His people was using these to try to completely sabotage their following the Lord and entering into the land that He promised.

We keep that in mind when we look at how it applies to us. An important principle in trying to apply an Old Testament passage to our time as Christians, as new creatures in Christ, is to take a look at what the author of the New Testament passage who comments on that Old Testament event says. What does that author say is God's purpose in writing that letter?

They had to put an end to this. This was an act of rebellion by being enticed. Numbers 31:16 says, "As Moses says, these, the women from Moab, caused the sons of Israel through the counsel of Balaam to trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor." So the plague was among the congregation of the Lord.

We have it documented that this was Balaam's plan to seduce the men and get them to be really enemies of the Lord by worshiping somebody else.

What is the counterpart for us? It is not from our past; that was Egypt. Now it is the temptations coming through current culture and through people in our lives.

The students deal with a lot of this with the Beyond Sex Ed at Stanford, which is advertising. Every student is required to participate in it. It includes students who are adherents to every possible form of sexual activity, describing how wonderful what they are pursuing is.

This is done, sanctioned, and required by the university out of wanting students to be informed and be tolerant of everybody else on campus, and they do not recognize the damage that is done. And we have students coming to us and saying, I didn't want to hear this. I didn't need to hear this. All these things were put in my mind and now they come back. Yeah. I knew about these things, but I didn't need to know about it in detail, graphic detail. And it replays in my mind.

They could go to the university and say, you are commanding me to violate what my God commands. That's hard for an incoming freshman to say.

The point is, what are the pressures to fit in from people around us? It can be different things at different ages and different areas. But with the desire that all of us have not to stick out and be the other, it's very easy to end up, out of wanting to fit in, doing things that you don't believe in. We've had many students who've done that. It's a huge pressure.

Here it was attractive. These guys have been out in the wilderness and it's kind of boring just gathering manna every day. They're looking for some excitement and they were glad to take it out.

Now, 1 Corinthians 10:9, "nor let us try the Lord as some of them did and were destroyed by the serpents." This is when the Lord set out to go around the land of Edom. They're back to the Red Sea again and it's actually really helpful.

Let's see, 21, "Then they set out from Mount Hor by the way of the Red Sea. So they're back to the—Mount Hor is China—to go around the land of Edom.

The people became impatient because of the journey. The people spoke against God and Moses, "Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no food and no water." Well, there has been. "And we loathe this miserable food." They are sick of manna. No matter how you fix it, it's still manna. Welcome to summer camp or boarding school.

But what's the issue? Impatience. Impatience with God. I want the results. I want the goodies now. Why is this taking so darn long? It's not all the excitement I thought was going to be part of this. I'm just tired of it. Why is it taking this long?

The trek from Egypt to Jericho could have been done in 10 days. The Lord had them, by His intent and His blessing, take a year to be in the wilderness where they were not in Egypt and not in the promised land where they simply did not have the natural resources. They had to trust the Lord.

He was showing His faithfulness to provide for them, to protect them, and to lead them. They were getting to know who He was.

He says in Exodus 19:4, "I carried you as on the wings of eagles and brought you to myself that you might be my precious treasure," His covenant people. Not just delivery out of slavery, but now entering into covenant love with this amazing God, who is acting to bless and bless and bless. And so what's the purpose of that time in the wilderness? They just want to get there. And so He’s prepared them to go into the promised land and do so trusting Him because there will be big challenges in there.

So what happens? They send 12 spies, one from each tribe. Joshua is one of them from the tribe of Ephraim, one of the half tribes of Joseph. Caleb is from Judah.

By the way, more insight into Caleb's name. I'm so used to Caleb as dog and being pejorative. But why do people name sons Caleb? What has another meaning which is related to dog? It's by crossing together Caleb ("kelev" כֶּלֶב), meaning dog, and leb ("lev" לֵב), meaning heart. So you get the idea then of having the heart of a dog. And how do we regard dogs positively? Their loyalty, their faithfulness, et cetera. So Caleb can have a very positive meaning.

So the 12 spies go in. They come back. And what we're told in Scripture is they gave an evil report to the land. It gets translated a bad report. Well, they gave the land bad marks, but that's not what it’s talking about. Their report was evil in that they did say, "Oh, yeah, it is a land flowing with milk and honey."

Just to show you that, it takes two men to carry a single cluster of grapes on a pole. Valley of Eshcol grapes. We have those on our wedding rings. We have two representations of it. One, the fruit cluster, and the other is the pruned vine, because there are seasons of fruitfulness, and then there are seasons where the Lord is pruning us so that we can be more fruitful.

So, it is flowing with milk and honey. But they're giants. And we're not powerful enough to face them. So we're not going. And fortified cities. Yeah, fortified cities, fortified to heaven. So we're not going to go. I don't care how good it is. We're not going.

But Joshua and Caleb were trying to convince the people to go in. "Yeah, there are. But the Lord will take care of us. He's proven that He'll take care of us." The Lord has promised. But they were convinced by the spies who gave an evil report, a report that contradicted the Lord's promises.

And so God said, "Okay, turn around and head back into the wilderness. And all you people who supported the 10 spies in the evil report, you, your entire generation, everyone who is of age, anyone over 20, is going to wander in the wilderness here until you die. And then your children, who didn't rebel against My calling to go in, will go in. They and their children who are born in the wilderness."

Then they say, "Oh, wait a minute. We will go. We'll go." The Lord says, "If you go, I'm not going with you. Because you've already refused." And in fact, what are they going to do? They're going to go up and go after a little place called Ai. It's a very interesting name. Ai means the heat. This is a destruction mound. There isn't even a city there. They're squatting on the rubble. Anyway, the description of it, there is a city, but it's not a major thing. It's known as the heap, even though they built a wall and so forth. [Correction: they were defeated by the Amalekites in Numbers 14:45. The battle at Ai was after the Israelites defeated Jericho in Joshua 7.]

They insist, no, no, we'll go up. We just sent 3,000 men. This is no big deal. This is just peanuts. And they get their behinds whipped. A number of them are killed. The Lord said, I told you not to go up. Now turn into the wilderness.

That third thing is being impatient with the Lord and the leadership that He's appointed. Especially it said they're impatient. They just want, I just want to get there. I just want the goodies. Instead of the process of getting to know the Lord, learning to trust Him so that this can be accomplished well.

We have that at Stanford with PhD students who just want to get it done. We often tell them, the Lord has you here on multiple agendas. Yes, the academics is an important part of His call. He gifted you. You've worked hard. He's opened the door. You're here. But He also has an agenda for your personal growth and your spiritual growth and your walk with the Lord.

Your research will not come together. You won't be able to write your dissertation until you have completed what the Lord is calling you here for personally. Then all of a sudden, the research effort that has had you banging your head against the wall will suddenly fall together. We've seen this many times. Time after time, that's what happens.

This is impatience with the process. We get in trouble when we're impatient. I don't like this. I just want to get there. Whatever the goal is, instead of, "Lord, You have me here so I get to know You and know Your trustworthiness and welcome that, grow in Your character, and then I'll be ready for what's next."

A friend was amazing. She taught high school, junior high. She started off with every new class at the beginning of the fall, and she said, "I've got teenagers of my own. And you need to know: I always win." And she did. Very quickly, they realized she would never, ever back down to them.

She told us about one time that there was a little girl over in their home who was using crayons. That's fine. The paper was on the floor, and she started scribbling off the paper on the floor with the crayons. Sue said, "Oh, well, that's okay. We can clean the floor. You just get to clean it up."

"I don't like to clean up."

"I didn't ask you if you like to clean up. I told you you are going to clean up."

She wasn't going to do anything, you know, sit there. And so Sue took the scrubber sponge or whatever it was, put the soap on it, and put it down. The little child wasn't going to do anything with it. Sue just picked up the kid's hand, put it on the sponge, and then the rag towel to clean up. The kid didn't want to do it but had to.

And this is the thing: "But I don't like to. I don't want to. I'm not going to." "Yes, you are."

I think I found that the place where this applies is when I start getting just tired of the process and restless, and restlessness leads to real trouble. Instead of saying, "Thank you, Lord, for the process. Help me to learn as much as I can about who You are and grow as much as I can. And thank You that You will enable from there real service that is exciting that I can do. But I have to be ready first before just putting me into it."

Whether it's a behavioral issue or a bodily issue—I mean, Erica is having extreme problems with her leg right now. We're seeking good medical help. She's got spondylosis where the bottom back vertebrae has slid out of place over the first hip and coccyx, and it's pinching the nerve. We're pursuing it.

But Erica needs to walk, and she walks every morning. I took one look at her when she came back to the door. I said, "You're in pain." The day before she called me; she carries her cell phone. I keep mine on. She called me and said, "I need the sag wagon." How far away was she? A quarter mile.

She's patient with the process. It doesn't mean she doesn't have moments. She's not enjoying the experience itself, but she is resting in the Lord's purpose for it. It doesn't mean she doesn't have her moments when she would like to cry out, "Lord, I'm tired of this. I've had enough of it." Well, she probably has told Him—I'm sure she told Him—"I'm tired of it." But she has not told Him, "I've had enough." Trusting Him to decide when she's had enough and whether this is for the rest of her life, how long she's going to be able to continue walking and so forth.

We keep entrusting that to the Lord, not because He can't handle it, but because we need to keep making sure we're in line with trusting Him to do it.

That third one is objection to the way the Lord is managing things. "Why not just make me perfect? And make my body perfect," and so forth.

He is helpful to tell somebody who desires to be healing—and we all are when things come up—God always heals. Sometimes physically. But physical healing is often not part of the plan. Sometimes there are more important things to grow in ministry through it.

**"Nor grumble as some of them did and were destroyed by the destroyer."** This is Korah's rebellion. This is arrogant... "I'm just as good as anybody else in leading." This is saying, "I don't like the leaders that God has chosen. So why does Aaron and his sons get to be the priests? I can do that just as well as they can. What's the big deal?" The Lord has them—yet they've all got these fire pans for incense and for other things, but not for the main thing that's delegated to Aaron and his sons only. The Lord says, okay.

And so the Lord has Moses say, "Fine, we'll do a test. So in the morning, everybody gets your fire pans, put the incense on it, and see who the Lord chooses."

The Lord does not indicate in any way that He accepts them. In fact, He tells everybody else to get away from their tents, where they and all their stuff is. The Lord has Moses announce, "If something that never happened happens and the ground opens up and swallows them, then the Lord is not chosen." Now, bear in mind, there are some group things that happen in this history. But that does not nullify the fact that the Lord always, in terms of eternal destiny, is the individual whose heart the Lord looks at. He demonstrates this even on the natural level. Destroy Jericho, but rescue Rahab the harlot and her family who chose to trust the Lord to save her as the rest.

The Lord does a course sort followed by a back sort. Jesus chooses the 12 disciples. They could not tell who the betrayer was. They're all saying, Lord, surely not I. It was not obvious. Judas was not the odd man out all along. He did not seem to be distinguishable from the others. But the Lord looks at the heart.

All right. So they've said, I'm just as good as anybody else. This is comparative with other people that are grumbling about not being the person.

And exactly what Moses said happens. We understand the physical phenomenon. It's an earthquake. It's a sinkhole created when two chunks of land move relative to each other. Some places result in land getting pushed up and other places sinking down. We have sinkholes up here on Skyline that you can see. So they are destroyed.

Historically this all happened because the issue in each case was not individual. It was a group of people who were determined to lead the whole people in a way contrary to the Lord. These were people who could derail God, the nation. You and Steve mentioned the example of the 10 spies who came back with an evil report and the whole congregation went with them and said, we can't trust the Lord.

The Lord had to be strong in these cases against these people because their well-being depended on trusting the Lord. The battle had to be the Lord's. What they were facing was bigger than they were, just as is true in our lives, and things are bigger than we are, but it takes trusting the Lord.

One of the questions that came up is, is this a warning that we could suddenly be zap dead? The answer is no. These were people whose hearts never were the Lord's. They just proved it again and again. The Lord had gotten them out of Egypt, but not Egypt out of them. They were still worshiping, and the Lord still wanted to go back. By allowing these people—a lot of them were following in the crowd but were not the Lord's—their heart was not with the Lord. But the Lord allowed these ones whose lack of trust in the Lord caused them to try to put an end to the Lord's leading the people by causing them not to follow. And so to be judged publicly, to teach them this principle, and said, now these things happened to them as an example, and they were written for our instruction upon whom the ends of the ages have come.

Now, the Lord works the same way throughout history. We see iteration after iteration after iteration. The specifics are different, but the principles are the same. And so what God did with the patriarchs, what God did with Israel, what God is doing in the church today, it's the same pattern.

But initially, it's in our charge to rule over the creation, specifically the realm of the living beings. Then with Israel, it's geopolitical rule over the promised land and management of God's society. In the church, it's our coming to rule over the sin within our physical body. And not just rule, but reign, which means have life and death authority, sovereign authority, life and death authority.

And working that out is a process of putting to death practices of the flesh and supplanting that with the life of the Spirit that we're living in this body.

Before we go on to the point that Paul is driving at, it's helpful to note, and again, this is a teaser for your own study, why did Paul even bring all this up? It's because he had already addressed these specific issues in the Corinthian church. If you look back at the letter of Corinth, every one of these issues come up that Paul has had to address.

As you probably know, the Corinthian church and the Corinthians in general were just as far out on the edge as possible in the pagan world. They were into sexual everything. As long as you actually could, you were expected to be using your sexual plumbing. It didn't really matter with whom or in what setting, but you were weird if you weren't. And they judged Paul for that.

Secular society had a term to Corinthianize. Ray Stedman used to talk about first and second Californians as the counterpart to first and second Corinthians. But Paul knows he's addressing in writing this letter, there are people who aren't even believers who are in there for other reasons. Maybe they just like the fellowship. They like the food. You notice in the church. And that's true in fellowship groups on campus and in the church. People are there for all sorts of reasons, and not just because of genuine belief. But then he knows, too, he's addressing believers at all levels of maturity, some who've just come to the Lord and what's in their lives, mostly the old. And that's true of all of us. And so why did we bring this up? First of all, to show that Old Testament narrative is very instructive for us, as long as we follow what Scripture says to do with it and not try to speculate and add to it. But also, we in our own lives get specifically tempted with these very areas. That's why we've tried to broaden what the temptation was. And you can think about that more.

Influence from our upbringing? Influence from the unbelievers around us? Wanting to fit in. Getting impatient with God's process. Why doesn't He just zap us with perfection the moment we believe? Because the process, the journey is really important. And then envy of others. Those are the big ones. Wanting their prestige. Those are the big categories.

This is very relevant. You will have many opportunities to be alert to these things. Where am I being tempted by it? I'm lured by it. Helping others who are stuck, who are maybe genuine believers, but they're not experiencing the Lord. They're just experiencing defeat in their lives and discouragement. It's very helpful to be alert to these issues as possibly the underlying cause.

Where have they gotten stuck? How can they move forward out of it? Recognize where they got stuck and welcome the process to move forward. We'll get into more of how to do that. But then he finishes with exactly that point.

Now, I'm going to jump to verse 13 first.

**"No temptation is overtaking you but such as is common to man. God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you're able. With the temptation will provide the way of escape also so that you may be able to endure it."**

This is a very comforting verse that many believers become familiar with, even memorized fairly early in their walk with the Lord. But taken out of context, it's dangerous because many believers, genuine believers, will lean on this as to saying, I don't have to worry. God is making sure everything is just fine. I don't have to worry about being tempted.

But it's important to include at least verse 12 and 14, but also 15. It's preceded by "let him who thinks he stands take heed lest he fall." So you think you're standing fine. You don't have to worry about temptation. You're misinterpreting because you're taking something out of context, which in its context, just one sentence before and one sentence after changes the entire impression of the statement.

"Think you stand, take heed lest you fall." You think you're not tempted? He's just gone through these various things. And yeah, those were specifics. But as we noted, they actually cover four different things. Sources of temptation, four categories. I think it's a complete set. These same things, we are all vulnerable to these kinds of temptations. Yes, what's our assurance in the midst of that, knowing that we are vulnerable, is that this is not something just completely strange. This temptation is not something happening to me alone. It's never happened to anybody else. And therefore, I can't possibly be expected to stand up under it. Everything is common to all of us. These things are widespread. They're everywhere.

Now, God is faithful. I am vulnerable, but this is not unique. God is faithful, and He will not allow me to be tempted beyond what I am able. Not meaning beyond what I am able in the natural abilities of the flesh, but not beyond what I am able by walking according to the Spirit. The Holy Spirit within me gives me the ability to withstand temptation.

The other thing is, God provides the way of escape! There is an exit ramp. There's an off ramp that you may be able to endure it. So I've got the assurance. This is not unique. God is faithful. The temptation is not something that I am unable to resist by the Spirit, though not by the flesh. There is always a way out. God makes sure there is a way out so I can endure it, literally hold up under it.

Then comes the imperative, and it is stated as an imperative. **"Therefore, my beloved,"** little assurance there, "my beloved," we are loved by God and by those who love God. **"Flee from idolatry."** We have all these assurances of God making sure that it is possible for us to overcome this temptation. We are vulnerable to temptation, but God has made sure that we can overcome it. We have to act also, not just trust God to act. We need to partner with Him by obeying His instruction to flee from it. That is, take the exit.

And then He adds, "I speak as to wise men. You know, you have the Spirit. You are able to be discerning. You judge what I say."

And this comes up a lot. We have students, former students in companies that do bonding things by going to pick up bars or a destination wedding where you are with people you don't know for a whole weekend of partying. Various ones have ended up totally drunk and ending up in the arms of somebody they don't even know. They don't know what they've done, don't even know if they are pregnant, and are just scared. They don't even know whether they had sex.

A note about that: we have been asked, should I write to him and ask, did we have sex? We said no. What is he going to say? He knows you are asking him. So he wouldn't want to say yes if that were the fact. He is going to say no out of self-protection for no other reason. There is no point in asking.

What you need to be asking is, How did I get into that situation? And Lord, teach me how not to get into that situation again. What choices have I made that made me vulnerable? You provide the way of escape. Did I take it? Did I make wise choices? What will I do in the future? And part of the beauty of this is, again, it shows that life as a new creature in Christ is a partnership with Him. We've seen again and again, "I am with you always." It is very helpful to note that, therefore, "my beloved flee from idolatry."

What is it that's made me vulnerable to the choices I keep making? What have I decided I have to have or can't have or have to be or can't be, have to experience or can't experience in order to have life? Because as long as I've decided that, I will keep going for it because that's where life is.

Cold Stone Creamery really got this in their marketing as they named their sizes, "like it", "love it", "gotta have it". "Gotta have it" is the mark of idolatry. "I've got to have it. I've got to have a boyfriend. I've got to have a girlfriend. I've got to have the worship of being an athletic hero. I've got to get into the Olympics and get the gold."

The point is not only what the patterns are in my life or someone else's, but what's driving it. What's the underlying issue? Learning to address that in the Lord. It's not just saying as a believer I can be in any situation and God will strengthen me and He will provide the escape and so I don't need to worry. This is saying no, we're all vulnerable. Where do I often get caught? It may be with anger, it may be with panic attacks, there are all sorts of signs of not being well. What's behind it? What am I pursuing? Is that actually from the Lord or not? What does He call me to instead? Renouncing the one, understanding more and more what the new looks like, which is who you are as a new creation and entering into it.

That's from Ephesians 4 and also Romans. We'll go into that again another time, but it's important to review how do I get out of idolatry?

The point here is to know that we all can be tempted with every one of these. You'll meet many other believers who are just completely stuck and defeated because of one or a number of these. Helping them to know who they are in the Lord and start making choices to go at the root and come free and experience the Lord is essential.

So that's the point. Idolatry is looking for life in something other than the Lord and therefore being compelled.

Remember the term lust really means to have a very strong drive. Where's the strong drive from? It's the logical imperatives that follow from it.

We used to say as distance runners that running is a relentless God. It tells you when to eat, how much to eat, when to exercise, when and how much sleep to get, and all kinds of things. If you want to pursue excellence as a distance runner, you have to do this, this, this, this. You can't do that, that, that, that. And that's the way idolatry works. Whatever it is that you've decided is a vital necessity for life. And we can make idols out of anything. The issue is conceptual images. Physical images are just expressions of the conceptual image. So we can't say because we don't make physical statues and bow down to them and worship them, we're not idolaters. The Holy Spirit enters our hearts and finds a whole pantheon there that we get to identify and deal with over, do temple cleaning for the rest of our lives with the Holy Spirit.

> Lord, thank you that You deliver us from the places where we are enslaved. But thank You, Lord, that even more importantly You guide us in taking on those areas and being part of dismantling the old and welcoming the new. Thank You that You have made every one of us who have welcomed You to come and take over our lives, that we are new creations from the core and You do complete what You've begun. But thank You that You call us to participate in that. And the pace of how fast it goes depends, in large part, on our welcome, since You don't force.

> And we're thankful, Lord, to be Yours and to get to grow in choices of trust and learning to reign over what comes from within more and more and being able to help others with compassion because we ourselves have had to deal with a lot in our own lives. Thank You that Yours is the victory. You always lead us in Your triumph in Christ Jesus. And faithful are You who call us and You also will bring it to pass.

> Thank You that You're right there to enable every bit of this and to give us the privilege of being part of Your work in the lives of others to encourage them forward out of defeat, out of despair, into real growth and seeing You and joy in the process. Thank You, Lord, in Your name.

Amen.