> Lord Jesus, thank you that you are our living Lord and that in the midst of spiritual harassment and worse we need not fear because you are with us and greater are You who are in us than he who is in the world.

> Lord, thank you for allowing plenty from this broken world to get through so that we get to rely closely on You more than ever and grow in Your character as You entered in and poured out Your life in care for broken and hurting people as all of us are and have been in various ways.

> Thank You that You are the rescuer, the healer. And thank You, Lord, for everyone who's here tonight. Thank You that all of us have responded to You, Jesus.

> We ask that You will fill us by Your Spirit to be strongly used by You in a time of growing darkness. May we be alert to the nudges of Your Spirit, filled with Your word, and used in strategic ways to further Your work.

> We ask You to speak to each one of us tonight. Open our ears and may we listen intently and turn to You to grow and to move forward with You even in more clear and strong ways.

> Thank You, Lord, for each one and their circumstances. Would You please encourage every one of them, every one of us, and underline for us the truths that are especially for us to walk in, and as well as equipping to be able to uplift and speak to others.

> Thank You, Lord, for each one so loved and precious to You and to us as well. Thank You, Lord God, for gathering us again. In Your name, amen.

### Introduction

As we mentioned in the announcement that we sent this quarter, we're focused especially on equipping for being able to speak with God's words, uplifting the right word at the right time, and sharing a lot of key passages that have been central in our training over 50 years that the Lord has used.

We will have some times of specific examples, which we've done a lot of in past years, of showing how the Scriptures really address specific issues.

Most of the time and over the years, we've concentrated almost exclusively on understanding who we are and how human life works and how and really things that are really the content of biblical counseling rather than the methodology of the counseling itself.

It's been in there, but it's been kind of in the background. We sense it's time to address that as a foreground issue.

We're going to have a lot of fun with this because we've had ideas of passages to look at and such, and last night was really amazing with the current students on campus because we dug into Ezra.

Ezra has a one-liner which is amazing for our calling. That's so much context that really brings the wonder of it forth. Ezra 7:10.

We tend not to know much about Ezra. He was an amazing man, amazing believer. We'll dig into that a bit.

 We learned more about Ezra than we ever knew yesterday while we were preparing and looking at some additional resources. I can't wait to meet him and get to talk.

As we noted in our announcement, you will meet in your lifetime a few individuals and couples that really seem to have the right word at the right time, who have the Lord's word to speak, to lift up, to encourage, to help you move forward, and who give vision by the contagious way they live out the life of the Lord. They bless a lot of people.

And then there are wonderful resources to ask questions of, to ask for insights from Scripture, passages to look into to understand some issue better.

What we're looking at in these early weeks of the quarter is (no matter what stage of life you're in) how can you develop being that sort of person? How can you develop and grow or further your growth so that you have the Lord's word for the right time and when people's ears are open because of their need? You can lift up the weary and the struggling and the disappointed and the angry and be really used powerfully by the Lord.

As Steve said, we're looking at a man that probably most of us don't know that much about, which is Ezra. He's a remarkable man. It is helpful to think about the context that he lived in.

He was in exile in Babylon after the southern kingdom Judah had been hauled off by Nebuchadnezzar. It is likely that his father or probably grandfather was one of the high priests who was taken to Nebuchadnezzar in Riblah and killed there as an example of killing the leaders of the Jewish people, of the kingdom of Judah.

This man grew up in very pagan Babylon that was full of idols and idol worship everywhere you turned. We know a lot from archaeology about all of the temples. It was a time when, as opposed to now, people really recognized that gods were real and powerful and, of course, demons.

The Persians swept in and swept off the line of Nebuchadnezzar with the weak King Nabonidus, and Babylon fell without a fight. Cyrus, who came in, claimed that it was because he was the choice of Marduk, the chief god, because they had been unfaithful. And so "Marduk opened the door to him." He actually did not allow his soldiers to rape and pillage and murder as was normal. He was just welcomed in as the choice of their chief God.

We know that Cyrus was moved by the Lord to let the first wave of Jewish exiles return to Jerusalem and start and rebuild the temple, a puny form of it that made those who remembered the old weep, as we know from Zachariah. But Zachariah said, "Don't despise the day of small things because it's not by might nor by our strength but by power—the power of the Lord."

Zerubbabel, the governor who began the rebuilding of the temple, got to finish it. But it took quite a while, lots of enemies.

And in the meantime, Ezra, from the line of Aaron, was raised in this very pagan Babylon. We know that he was in the royal court because we're told that Artaxerxes, the current ruler of Persia, granted him all he requested to go back to Jerusalem and reestablish worship there to the Most High God.

And at that time, Persia was the most powerful empire in the Mediterranean world. It stretched from Greece to India and down all the way into Egypt. Very powerful.

### What was Ezra's impact?

We want to look at what was it in how Ezra pursued his life that enabled him to be used so powerfully by the Lord, so that the king of this vast empire would commission him and give him tremendous riches to return to Jerusalem and reestablish worship of the Most High God there.

One thing we've noted with memorial services is that you get to see a lot of the whole life and the bottom line of what the impact of someone was. And we get that same thing as we look at the biographies in Scriptures.

 2 Chronicles is one of my favorites where you see kings that are good and follow the Lord and the enormous life-giving impact they have and kings that are absolutely the opposite—horrendously wicked and evil, worshiping demons, and burning their babies—and you get to see the whole life.

And the question is, if you were to characterize Ezra’s life, what would you say about how it was pursued and what was its impact?

And we have the advantage of that with Ezra.

We have some key parts in Scripture that help us see the lifestyle Ezra developed that enabled him to be so powerfully used by the Lord and to be used strategically by the Lord God to reestablish worship in Jerusalem and lead the people in a spiritual renewal of covenant with their God.

One man. And he had the ear of thise powerful Lord of all of Persia. What was ditd thEzrat he developed in his life that alerted Artaxerxes that this man was connected with, for Artaxerxes, a powerful God?

And so lLet'’s look at the text together and looksee at what wEzras itdeveloped in that very pagan, decadent culture and place of power did Ezra develop in his lifestyle that enabled him to be so powerfully used by the Lord.

There is a one-sentence summary of the core of Ezra's life: in Ezra 7:10.

"Ezra set his heart to seek the law of the Lord, to do and to teach statutes and ordinances in Israel."

This was the core of Ezra's life and what the Lord did through him. Let's unpack the verse.

It reads very simply, and it actually begins with Ezra setting his heart to study the law. This follows immediately after Ezra led about 5,000 people back to Jerusalem. It took four months for them to get there, going across the desert. And so this statement is given as a reason why Ezra did or was able to do what he did. He had set his heart, established his heart. That is, he committed his will to study, literally seek the law of the Lord, seek out the truth that God reveals in His word about the absolutes of life, and to do it, to practice it, to live it out, and to teach statutes and ordinances in Israel.

Statutes are instructions for how to manage life functionally, logistically, organizationally, practically. And ordinances is what we might call case law, has to do with relationships and circumstances and situations that arise as people seek to live together.

So, what do you do when your neighbor's cow comes and eats your family vegetable garden? What do you do when somebody harms someone else directly? These are the keys for life.

And it's interesting the law—people tend to think, well, the term law is used for various different things at different levels, but the people mistakenly assume God's word is just a never-ending string of do, don't do, don't do, don't do, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't.

It's not nothing but absolute demands and threats.

What makes something a law? We use the term law in a judicial sense, but we use it in a secular sense too. And in that sense, we're able to appreciate the essence of law in a way that gets obscured when we're talking about the judicial and legislative and so forth.

In science, what is the law?

> I had a question because I was just writing out the verse here for myself.
In my translation, statute and judgment, they're singular. I was hearing statutes. And I just wondered if that had any significance.

I believe it's plural. Let me just check the Hebrew.

Hooray that Steve understands the Hebrew and the Greek. It's a real gift.



They are singular, but singular in the sense of a generic.



And the other thing that struck me, which again may be sidebar, is this brings to mind to me this verse, the Great Commission. Some of the vocabulary, it's just the idea, but here's Ezra to teach and teach them to do everything God said.

What I love about studying the Bible, is that thing that we read in the New Testament, it actually was first said in the Old Testament.

And again, with that question of what's the bottom line of my life and what I'm developing because we develop who we become and we all change a lot, and this was what Ezra did that developed who he became and then how he could be used.

 And part of what we talked about is Steve was starting to allude to with we've talked with students about what is a law because and how did Ezra view it? Because a lot of times students and others will look at it as, oh, it's a whole long list of restrictive injunctions and there's no way I want to be under that.

I'll never forget. Some of you heard me recount this before.

Way back in 1973, a couple of years ago, Erica and I were at Urbana University's Triennial Missions Conference at Christmastime. And Paul Little, who was an amazing man, and it's ironic that he's named Paul, which means small, and the family name is Little.

And he was neither. He was a mountain of a man, but he was also a big man of faith and excellent teaching.

I remember him at one of the plenary sessions saying that many people look at God as this ogre, leaning down over the balcony rail of life, looking for someone who's having fun so he can say, "Cut it out."

People think, oh, killjoy, interfering with my freedom. We actually had a student who we didn't know personally, but heard about through other students. We did know that she came from a Christian background, whatever that meant. She got to Stanford and about a year in, decided, "To heck with this. I don't believe, I don't, it's just restrictive. It's keeping me from having fun."

She threw the whole thing off and headed into the party scene. We were just praying for her because we knew the scars and heartache that she would be building up there. In the name of freedom from restriction, this is not that at all. And it's not how Ezra viewed law.

As Steve was saying, we use the term law with science. When does something become accepted as a law in science? How does a law of science develop in its acceptance? Well, it's a hypothesis given experiments. Somebody has an idea, they propose that this appears to be true. Then they do experiments. Based on the results of these experiments, they make a conclusion.

All right. So there's a lot of evidence, then it becomes accepted as a theorem, but still not as law until what point of arrival? The point at which it is generally agreed that there appears very solidly to be no exception. Like the law of gravity.

Yep. And it's a law only if it is something that is true without exception anywhere. If an exception is ever found, it gets demoted from a law. And this is what God's law is. God tells us what the absolutes are that we need to know about human life. This is the way life is designed. This is the way life works.

If you cooperate with the design, life will go well. If you depart from it, it won't go as well. It's really wisdom for life. Scripture tells us who the Lord is and how we can be in relationship with Him. But it's also often been called the book that goes with man, that the Creator of all of us reveals wisdom for good human living, for good interactions with one another, for good choices.

 We have free will. It makes us the guinea pigs of our own life. We have the freedom to make choices, but there are built-in consequences. So I don't have to just size it up by sight and try to figure it out. Many things look great at the beginning, but they deal out death down the road, experiential death. Scripture tells me the wise choices, the good choices, and the goodness that comes from that. It warns us about choices that often look good, but in fact are not good.

But then we're still free to heed that advice, accept that wisdom, or try out doing it, not doing it, and compare. It's actually remarkable how little the Lord makes as absolutes. There are a lot of times where we wish He would reveal more. "I need to know what to do. Please send me a telegram."

We had a student who got a telegram from God once. Courtesy of the rest of the group, we're constantly talking about needing a telegram from God. But there are clear statements of this is this and not that, will lead to long-term well-being in your own life and in the lives of those that you impact.

It was that that Ezra set his heart to study, to know, and then to do. This was not just theoretical knowledge. He was not packing in a PhD and becoming a top theologian. He was getting to know through welcoming, through walking accordingly. Of course, not perfectly, but you learn by your mistakes as well as by doing it right.

He was not just seeking to become an academic expert who could propound the theories of... But someone who knew there's a saying in education: "Those who can do, those who can't teach, those who can't teach, teach teachers." He quoted that to a Stanford education professor. She was not amused. It was not the right time or the right person.

I do have a question. He said he started to study the law of Yahweh, not just law. So what was the law? I keep hearing these phrases in my head: the laws of the Medes and the Persians, or the law of the land. This concept of law that's on a human level. I was curious what that law was because later either in Ezra or in Nehemiah...

It's in Nehemiah 8, I think, 7 or 8, where it says that Ezra was committed to the teaching of the law that the Lord gave Israel through Moses. The Israelite, Jewish view of the Old Testament—we call it Scriptures, the Hebrew Bible—has three sections: the law, the prophets, which includes what we think of as historical books, and the writings—Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Song of Solomon, etc.

To study the law, it's the law handed down to God's people by the Lord through Moses. So it's Nehemiah 8, verse 1, and we'll get into this in just a bit. But once he does get back to Jerusalem, the people are gathered together. As one man at the square, this is Nehemiah 8:1, which is in front of the Water Gate. And they asked Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had given to Israel.

 And Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly of men, women, and children, and all who could listen with understanding. And he read from it from early morning until midday, and all the people were attentive to the book of the law.

So I have a question. When they say law, is it the Torah? Meaning, was he reading from Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Deuteronomy, and Numbers? When I think of the law, I think about Deuteronomy, like the do's and don'ts, the feasts and the festivals.

But if you think about the Torah starting with creation, it's studying not just the do's and don'ts, but studying who God is, who we were meant to be, and then what happened, the fall, and then the consequences of the fall. And then Deuteronomy and Leviticus are ways that God is helping the Israelites—it's their path of redemption.

 It's the whole setting who God is, and with that, His spoken word. It's the five books of Moses, and it tells us who God is, who we are, and what God's design for our relationship with Him is.

Just to break out the five books of Moses: Exodus is how the nation of Israel came into being. Deuteronomy is the restatement of the law on the verge of entering into and taking possession of the promised land under Joshua.


Genesis tells us how it all got established prior to the nation of Israel. That's Genesis; it tells us all about the history of the patriarchs, the history of God's establishing covenant relationship with people who would welcome the invitation.

Between Genesis and Deuteronomy, you have the three. Exodus is the origin of the nation. Leviticus is the administration under the Levitical priesthood because the core of who Israel is, is the relationship with God. Worship is the core. That's the administration of it.

And Numbers then is the equipping of the population to act as the Lord's agents and taking up the responsibility that He's called us to and invites us into.

You may have heard it said that there are 432 or something like that commandments. There are not. Some Jewish state lawyers have gone and tried to count every instruction God gives and say there are commandments. No, they're not. They're commandments, statutes, and ordinances, and we don't need to get into that distinction, but commandments are absolutes.

And the other things that are, of course, important, but they're not on the level of a commandment. They are not, "this is life and that is death."

One more comment about law.

Yeah, Frank.

When you were drawing the analogy with physical laws that we can observe, like Newton, like the first and second laws of thermodynamics and so forth, these are things that are observable. They are without exception, as you said.

And I'm thinking in the same way. It's like what was said earlier about the law. There's certainly the different books that we're talking about here. But aren't there also natural laws of God? For instance, sin and death is there. It's pervasive. It goes all throughout. And does it really kind of go back to that aspect of law? Or are we talking about the whole of the law?

The term law is used on a couple of levels. It's used specifically for the law of Moses, the first five books of the Bible. And then it's used in a looser sense sometimes, almost to refer to the Hebrew Bible. But that's more like a colloquial usage than a technical usage. So sometimes that's confusing.

Jewish scholars and scholars in general think that Ezra used his time to gather the books of what we call the Old Testament in the order that they're in in the Jewish Bible. He was the one who did it. He is considered to be at least the foremost player, with Nehemiah and Malachi, to hold together the canon, the accepted books of Scripture.

And even beyond that, he's widely regarded as being the author of 1 and 2 Chronicles. Many attribute to him Psalm 119, which is my favorite. Many times in my morning study, I read another stanza of Psalm 119 in the Hebrew and pray through it.

If you want to get down to the essence of law, look at the Ten Commandments. Every one of those is a life and death matter. They're absolute. And thank you for pointing to being observable. The fact that they are matters of life and death is observable.

Now, just as people deny what almost everyone else is convinced of, like people who still cling to the Flat Earth view for example, it is observable. If you look at human society and everything in that checklist, it is very observable and reflected in our secular civil laws.

It could be helpful to read a bit here and there through...

Can I just make another comment about the law, the statutes, the ordinances? Really, all the counseling we do, all biblical counseling really comes down to the law of God. You have the foundation in what God reveals about, especially in Genesis, about who He is, who we are. And of course, He's revealing more and more of who He is as we gain eyes to see and ears to hear.

 Counseling and counseling from the Word is mostly concentrated after establishing an understanding of who God is, how He reveals Himself, and what our relationship is to Him. The rest of it is all teaching statutes and ordinances. It's all teaching people what does and doesn't work in life, both in our functional management and in our social interpersonal relationships.

CaOn I add one thing that you may have said because I had to step out for a second? But I think one of the key places here is when he says, "seek the law of the Lord." In other words, all other laws mean nothing. He was seeking with his heart the law of the Lord. And that is pretty critical all the way back to the Garden of Eden when it was only one.

YThere ah.re vast implications of ignoring it, thinking we know better.

Yeah, and really Ithough, it wasn't stated yet what was the law that was violated in the fall: first commandment, y"You shall have no other gods before me." And there' is a very interesting thing about that culturally.

It can be interpreted and it isn't stated in so many words, but nobody got no other gods before my face. And tWhe reason I note that is when we were in Israel, we saw various religious figures and idols of gods. They often came with a set of masks.

If you thought your God was happy with you, you put a happy face on the little statue of God, or you put an angry face on. You know, the charts which are really helpful for helping kids to communicate their emotions. You may have seen some of these charts for young children. They've got all the different smiley, frowny, angry, whatever faces.

ActOually, our eldest granddaughter and her parents find this helpful because she can't always explain how she's feeling, but they will go to the chart and she will point to the face. "This is how I'm feeling." It helps her to, it helps them to talk about it and pray.

I think hHe set his heart to study and know God's law, to know the ways of God, and then aligned himself with the ways of God. And that put him in a position to be able to be used significantly by the Lord to encourage many, many others, to teach many others.

And thSe setting the heart on this, he knew this is where life is. This is the most important thing. And it's not just head knowledge.

We had a student last night who' is not a believer and who was asking, what's the difference between Ezra described as a scribe? What about the scribes of Jesus' day? And what's the difference?

We said, well, Ezra knew that this is where life is, and this is where I'm committed to walk with the Lord. And Jesus faulted the scribes of His day again and again. "You search the scriptures thinking in them you have eternal life, but actually they point to me.

" And you tie your spices, but you neatly set aside the more important things of the law, like honoring your parents, and say, everything I have is devoted to God, so I can't help you, my parents. And that they didn't do anything. That's it. They didn't do. Jesus constantly faulted them for saying, "You study, you teach, but you don't do."

And Ezra committed himself to, made it probably the fundamental objective in his life, to study God's revealed word and to do it, then to teach.

Question. I should know the answer to this already, but is this—were the Psalms available to him?

Some of them.

Because I'm thinking of Psalm 1.

You're saying now, and I'm just curious if he had that.

Well, we do have psalms that are identified as psalms of David, so we have a firm dating window for those. Psalms 1 and 2 are not attributed to David, so we don't know. I wouldn't necessarily know, but I'm not aware of any dating for Psalms 1 and 2. But the tradition is very strong that he was the one who compiled the canon as we know it—Ezra was of the Old Testament, what we call the Old Testament.

So it must have been available. And he was compiling it. And more than that, more than that was passed down from him.

He is considered by many to be the first expository teacher of scripture that we know of.

His—the podium that was erected when they got back to Jerusalem was recorded in Nehemiah 8, where the people wanted to be taught the word, and Ezra was teaching it. Then he had a cadre of assistants who were helping people to understand it, and they spent a week.

They discovered that they needed to be celebrating the Feast of Booths, so they did.

So they spent the whole week reading all of the books of Moses and having people who understood them well help people to understand what it means and how to apply it.

This is from Nehemiah 8.

So Ezra is credited with establishing the traditions of the pulpit.

So Nehemiah 8 is well worth reading.

Of course, all of scripture is, but part of it you want to read particularly.

Yeah.

And part going back also.

Sure.

Before that.

But by the time he is in Jerusalem and the people gather to celebrate the dedication of the temple—

All the people, this is Nehemiah 8, all the people gathered as one man at the square, and they asked Ezra to bring the scribe, to bring the book of the law, which the Lord had given to Israel.

Then Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly of men, women, and all who could listen with understanding on the first day of the seventh month, and he read it before the square, which was in front of the Watergate, from early morning until midday, in the presence of men and women, those who could understand, and all the people were attentive to the law, the book of the law.

And Ezra the scribe stood at a wooden podium—so there's the pulpit—which they had made for the purpose, and beside him stood a whole group of Levites on his left hand.

 And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people, for he was standing above all the people.

And when he opened it, all the people stood up.

 Then Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God.

And all the people answered, "Amen, amen," while lifting up their hands.

 Then they bowed low and worshiped the Lord with their faces to the ground.

And also all of these Levites explained the law to the people while the people remained in their place, and they read from the book, from the law of God, translating to give the sense so they could understand the reading—translating or interpreting— does not necessarily mean from one language to another.


Then Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra the priest and scribe, and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people, "This day is holy to the Lord your God. Do not mourn or weep."

 For all the people were weeping when they heard the words of the law.

Then he said, realizing how far they were from what God instructed them, "Go, eat the fat, drink the sweet, and send portions to him who has nothing prepared, for this day is holy to our God.

 Do not be grieved, for the joy of the Lord is your strength."

For the rest of the week, he reads scripture to them.

And at the end of the week, they made the booths.

 They lived in the booths.

And that had not been done since the days of Joshua.

And there was great rejoicing.

And he read from the book of the law of God daily from the first day to the last day.

And they celebrated the feast seven days.

And on the eighth day, there was a solemn assembly according to the ordinance.

So this is the returnees.

And this is really when they dedicate themselves, renew the covenant with their God.

And He is instrumental, central in the returnees renewing the covenant with their God and purifying themselves.

And it's interesting that our studying this is coinciding right now with the current Jewish holiday.

 Today is Rosh Hashanah.

And this is the beginning of the high holy days that finishes today. In a week, October 1st, with the Day of Atonement. It's a week of deep joy and celebration, but also of serious going to the Lord and reviewing with Him how each one has lived their life, asking for forgiveness, and where they have harmed others, going to set things right with them. It is really reviewing with the Lord, "how do I want to live differently next year?"

Years ago, a Jewish newscaster ago interviewed Steve. He told us his favorite day of the year is the Day of Atonement. He said that it is the day of fresh beginnings, and that he follows the law not to try to be good enough, but out of thanksgiving to God. And it is really beautiful to see an Old Testament true believer. We really connected the spirit.

But that's what was being celebrated with Ezra and the way that he had lived his life. And what he devoted himself to prepared him to be used by the Lord in this very significant way. Scholars see him as the one through whom the Jewish synagogue was established, with the central part of reading and discussing the Scriptures as part of synagogue since the temple was gone. Then they would center their worship on the Lord and on His word. And that also was established by Ezra.

So it's amazing how much one man who set his heart to study the Lord's words and ways and walk in it and then to share it with others, the impact that he could have. And that principle of the one person, the remnant coming down even to one single person, is beautifully illustrated in the Lord's creation with the metamorphosis of moths and butterflies.

I can't mention this without thinking of a wonderful cartoon, the two caterpillars looking up at a butterfly and one of them saying to the other, "You'll never get me up in one of those things." But what happens in the pupa when the caterpillar becomes basically a kind of a case, everything turns into a puddle of organic nutrients except for one single cell, which is in the caterpillar and is the only one that does not melt into this sort of prime metamorphic soup. And then that one cell has the information to make the butterfly or the moth and passes that to the other cells as they are formed out of that soup that was the caterpillar—one just one out of many.

And the Lord does that repeatedly. He has done it many, many times in history. All it takes is one person, either on the broad scale of things or in any sort of a local context.

One other thing that came up last night with the students that is very helpful is as we were reading Ezra 7, we asked the question, what was his profession? I'll just read a bit.

"Now, after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, there went up Ezra, the son of Sariah, who was actually murdered before the king of Babylon. But anyway, he goes all the way back to Aaron, the chief priest, Phineas and then Aaron. This Ezra went up from Babylon. He was a scribe skilled in the law of Moses, which the Lord God of Israel had given. And the king granted him all he requested, because the hand of the Lord his God was upon him."

The question we asked is, is Ezra described as a scribe? A humorous note: scribe, the way that term was used, was one who could write fast. Think of all of us today with the computer keys. A scribe was someone who could write fast, and he was a scribe of the law of the Lord.

 But anyway, was that his profession? Was that his secular work? And the answer is no. This is what he did at the core of his being and who he was and what he devoted himself to. But he was almost certainly an official in the court of King Artaxerxes bearing a lot of responsibility because it was the way he lived and carried out his responsibilities that told this man, the king knew him. And he knew his character.

And how did he know him? He's in the court. He's bearing responsibility. He has secular work. But his primary personal approach is studying the Lord and His word and living it. And it was how he lived it that alerted the king. This man is a man of integrity and a man who can bear a lot of responsibility, and who is a leader of people that the king could trust.

Artaxerxes is in a position where he knows him well enough to have Artaxerxes grant all that Ezra requests. And he's requesting a second wave of exiles and being able to establish the worship services in the temple again to gather the leaders, the Jews remembered. Jeremiah says it's going to be 70 years and we get to go back. And so they were preparing and there are different cities within the Persian Empire where people were preparing. And carrying on to be Levites and priests and all of that because he's able to gather them and he knows where to find them. And to gather them at the river Ahava before they head across the desert and to find teachers of the word.

By the way, the name, the river,
Ahava.

And so, and it says again and again, because the hand of the Lord, His God, was upon him. And so he was living the type of life that the Lord could use so powerfully.

And then it says that the decree that Artaxerxes gives to Ezra, the priest, the scribe, learned in the words of the commandments of the Lord and His statutes to Israel, the decree is incredible with what he entrusts to this man.

He says, Artaxerxes, I won't read all of it, but king of kings, to Ezra, and he addresses him as the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect peace. And now I have issued a decree that any of the people of Israel and their priests and Levites in my kingdom who are willing to go to Jerusalem may go with you.

So as opposed to the Egyptian ruler who would not let the people go, this man is saying any who want to go, go with my blessing and permission.

And can I say quickly, because you just right there when you're reading, this is the copy of the letter. That is amazing. This is not sort of, well, he went and went here and there. This is actually the copy of the letter.

Yes.

That's beautiful.

Isn't it?

And it's written in Chaldean. And then he switches to Hebrew right after this letter.

And he's sending back all the gold and silver utensils from the temple that Nebuchadnezzar had taken and a whole lot of this plain gold and silver, all kinds of things and everything needed for the temple worship.

 Now, this is not just totally altruistic and he's not the only king of old who did such a thing, but the part of the commission is so that the temple services and worship can take place and people pray for the king and his sons, meaning, uh, yeah, and Ezra 7:23:

"Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done with zeal for the house of the God of heaven, lest there be wrath against the kingdom of the king and his sons."

He's aware this is a powerful God, and wants to be on His good side.

And the king wanted to send an armed guard. This is a very rich caravan, extremely rich caravan.

Just to finish about Artaxerxes' letter, which, as you said, Terrell, is amazing that we actually have it. We have the copy of it in Chaldean because it's recorded by Ezra.

And he says that the king and his seven counselors—there were seven powerful ruling families with the Persians—and they sent massive amounts of gold and silver as part of this themselves, as well as saying, you're welcome to take it from any of your people who want to give.

And from my treasury beyond the river, you're welcome to take what you need. He did set some limits.

And he tells the administrators in that place to supply everything that Ezra needs from the public treasury.

And he says also in verse 18, "And whatever seems good to you and to your brothers to do with the rest of the silver and gold, you may do according to the will of your God."

So he's not stipulating how all of it's going to be used. The king has tremendous trust in Ezra. He has tremendous respect for this man of integrity and this man who represents the God of heaven.

Ezra has honed a life that has commanded this respect from the most powerful man of the Mediterranean world. So it's what can be developed in any of our lives. And then the Lord can use us strategically to speak to others.

And I just say, I think it's really interesting that in the decree, how it's not so much Ezra, but it's Ezra's God. The king mentions your God so many times. I'm sure that's also God unveiling that to him.

You know how we pray. I remember Erica praying, "May I be able to show God forth today, whatever I do," the whole idea that not only did the king not just see Ezra as a person, but saw him as a great person because of his God.

Because of his God, he made that connection. I think that's what's really pushing him.

To bring the focus from Ezra to God is really important because there's so much about God.

It's clear he has recognized that God in Ezra. And the king wants to send a sizable military guard because this would represent probably about the most tempting plunder that ever passed through that region.

So he's gathered all of these temple servants and Levites, and ministers to the house of God. Ezra 7:21, "And then I proclaimed [so probably about 5,000 people. And it includes children.] a fast there at the river of Ahava that we might humble ourselves before our God to seek from Him a safe journey for us, our little ones, and all our possessions, including all that wealth. For I was ashamed to request from the king troops and horsemen to protect us from the enemy on the way, because we had said to the king, "The hand of our God is favorably disposed to all those who seek him, but his power and his anger are against all who forsake him.

So we fasted and sought our God concerning this matter, and He listened to our entreaty." And then he entrusts the wealth to the different people to take charge of it and deliver it to Jerusalem in an unarmed caravan.

Then verse 31: "Then we journeyed from the river Ahava on the 12th of the first month to go to Jerusalem. And the hand of our God was over us. And he delivered us from the hand of the enemy and the ambushes."

A group that size does not go unnoticed, and the news of the wealth does not go unnoticed. And there were enemies and ambushes, but they saw the Lord protect them.

Ezra is not just a man who studies the word to gather knowledge or be a theologian. He has radical trust in his God. It is this trust that makes him such a powerful instrument in the hands of God.

So just enjoy looking at him more. We've been hugely inspired by him. I can't wait to meet him and yet to hear more. But there's no end to how the Lord can use us with divine appointments as we approach life this way.

And I'll just finish with a little story. Years ago, Steve and I got to go running with Jimmy Carter and a couple of Secret Service agents. And others were welcome (from a prayer breakfast), but you had to keep up with him. And we got to run with him—the five of us, three verbal participants and two just there. Secret Service with ears open.

We had about a half hour of uninterrupted conversation. So he was telling us about opportunities he'd had to share the gospel with other heads of state while he was president.

And apparently at one point, he was in a taxi, of course, a very exclusive limo in Egypt, with Anwar Sadat. And Anwar Sadat asked him, you know, "I understand how Jews and we Muslims trace ourselves back to be descendants of Abraham, but why the Christians? I don't understand."

Jimmy Carter got to proclaim the faith of Abraham and how Christians are also part of the seed of Abraham, people of faith in the true God. And two months later, Sadat was assassinated, but he got to hear the gospel, and Jimmy Carter explained the whole thing to him.

 And then he was also telling us that another time he was in a taxi with one of the presidents of—President Kim Park, I think, of South Korea. And that same question, I don't know how it was posed, but he wanted to know about Carter's faith. And so he explained the gospel to him. He too was assassinated two months later.

Well, you don't have to worry anymore because Jimmy Carter isn't telling anyone on earth now. That's right. The gospel. But he had these amazing opportunities because he was a man who trusted the Lord and walked with the Lord.

And he was telling us too that he had gotten to know the queen and princesses of the Netherlands who were strong believers and would even go door-to-door evangelizing. Can you imagine? Sure, welcome. What would you like to talk about?

We may not reach heads of state, but there are amazing opportunities that the Lord opens to each of us as we approach the Word and the Lord the way that Ezra did.


> Oh, Lord, thank you for these forerunners of faith, of trust in You. People like Ezra who have walked deeply with You in the midst of a very secular world, really demon worshiping society, and thank You that he was not controlled or swayed by the wealth and the pomp and wanting the glory from people but that he earnestly sought You from the heart and devoted himself to know You, to know Your ways, and to walk in them with You.

> And thank You that he blessed an enormous number of people, including all of us, with not only the history of what he did, but imparting 1 and 2 Chronicles, Psalm 119, compiling the Old Testament canon. And Lord, we are so thankful for this man and his walk with You and how You used him from the very top of the Mediterranean world and also with Your people to renew the covenant from the heart and to walk with You and to make study of Your word a central part of their daily, weekly, yearly lives and the cycle of worship. Thank You, Lord. May we do the same in Your name. Amen.
