> Lord Jesus, thank You that You are the same yesterday, today, and forever.

> Thank You for Your great love for us, no matter what the season is, and how You walk with us through the highs and the lows and the snow and the sun. Lord, we thank You that You are with us in every situation. And Lord, we thank You for every opportunity we get to recognize that.

> Lord, we thank You for the opportunity tonight to look at the issue of anxiety and how You equip us to come out from anxiety and into trusting You and serving You and partnering with You, even when the circumstances haven't yet changed. Lord, thank You that You give us hope and perspective and courage to walk with You step by step in every season, in every setting. And Lord, thank You that as we do, we get to know You more. We get to bring Your life and join Your redemptive work. Lord, thank You that it's worth it and worthwhile.

> Lord, we thank You for Your magnificent invitation and call. And Lord, we ask that as we look at Philippians 4 and other texts tonight, that You would grow us and lead us to walking it out and experiencing victory and joy with You in ways that we didn't know were possible, or at least to the degree to which it's possible because of You, Lord.

> Lord, we lift up this time and ask that You would teach us and grow us. We pray this in Your name. Amen.

Tonight we get to look at the issue of anxiety, which is a universal issue. And as we go in life, we all have more and more things to be anxious about.

I'm not that old yet, but I've definitely had more than my fair share of what I like to call, I liken anxiety sometimes to a tornado of nonstop thoughts cycling in my mind, and really a sense of paralysis of, I'm thinking about it, I sense threat, my nervous system is, I feel like I'm metaphorically on my tiptoes the entire time and just unsettled, and in that state and not sure how to get out of that state.

And other times I characterize anxiety like a cloud, and I'm stuck in the cloud, and everything seems hazy, and I can't see what's around the corner, and that is threatening and scary.

I'm sure others have had different ways of characterizing anxiety, but I think it's an experience common to man. And in fact, it is one of the adversary's main tactics, actually, that he uses to make us unfruitful. Anxiety is actually a matter of spiritual warfare.

And we get to see that a bit in our text tonight in Philippians 4, but also in all three of the Synoptic Gospels. In Matthew, Mark, and Luke, Jesus tells the parable of the sower who sows the seed of His word. And in all of them, there's the seed that gets sown on the thorns, and it says that these are the ones. This is the version in Luke, Luke 8:14: "The seed which fell among the thorns, these are the ones who have heard, and as they go on their way, they're choked with worries and riches and pleasures of this life and bring no fruit to maturity."

In Mark, it says, it chokes out the word and it becomes unfruitful, and Matthew also, unfruitful. It's a major tactic that the adversary uses to make us unfruitful in relation to Him, and we're not able to reproduce His life while we are stuck in this anxiety tornado or the cloud of anxiety or however you want to characterize it.

I told the students last night, believe it or not, the older you get, the more things there are to get anxious about. You have more people in your life that you're responsible for often, and all the health issues. It's the list of things that we get concerned about. We use nice words instead of worry: I'm just concerned, or we have lots of terms for it, but we can get tied in knots and totally distracted by what's going on, and especially the sense that I'm out of control. I can't seem to control this. And somehow, if I think hard enough, long enough, I will be in control, which of course is not true at all.

It keeps us thinking and analyzing and trying to solve whatever it is, and keeps us solidly distracted and focused on that. And we know some people where it's at a chronic level, where they collect things to worry about and never let any of them go. It's kind of a treasured stash that the more things I know might happen, somehow the better I can be prepared, which you're not, but you can never let any of them go. I'll keep gathering them.

It can be about health issues. It can be about all sorts of things. It is a major tactic of the adversary to deflect us. Each of us as believers are dangerous to the adversary. When we're connected with the Lord and moving with Him, we are dangerous to all of his plans and work. If he can distract us through worry, he's really won, not in the long run, but for the moment I'm disabled from really serving the Lord. It's a very important topic, far more than we begin to guess.

I taught about 100 women on this up at Mount Hermon last year. People were recognizing, yep, that's my life. Oh, I want to know what to do with it. And that's what we're getting into tonight.

I think many of us have read in the Sermon on the Mount the passage on anxiety and on worry. And in Matthew 6:25 it starts, and I'm not going to read the whole thing. It's a long passage, but it says, **"For this reason I say to you, do not be worried about your life, what you will eat or what you will drink, nor for your body, what you will put on. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing? Look at the birds of the air. They don't sow nor reap nor gather into barns. And your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth much more than they?"**

Actually, it's a very structured analysis of all this, and I'll highlight just two more verses. Verse 27: **"And who of you, by being worried, can add a single hour to his life?"** And as Erica mentioned, it's as we analyze and try to come up with all the different possible ways that things could go, we think that, by being aware of these things, we're going to somehow have results to increase our life. And actually, the Lord is saying, is that really the case? We can shorten life with worry, not add to it.

And then later it says, don't be for worried about clothing, worried about what we'll eat, what will we drink. **"And it says the Gentiles eagerly seek these things for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. But seek first His kingdom and His righteousness and all these things will be added to you. So do not worry about tomorrow for tomorrow will take will care for itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own."** So we have, seek first His kingdom and His righteousness. The Lord knows that we need all these things, and He will add them to us.

And for me, I've read this passage a number of times in the past, and the Lord definitely speaks through it. But especially when I'm in the middle of anxiety, at times it can be hard to say, "Yeah. Seek first His kingdom and His righteousness."

So how exactly do I then begin to trust that He knows that I need these things and that He will provide? And that's what we get to begin looking at a little bit more in Philippians 4.

And one wonderful thing about that Matthew passage is the Lord does not belittle those needs. Those are real needs, and when they're lacking, it's scary. It's frightening.

And in the first years of our ministry, we've always been on a faith support basis where we've lived, "Seek first His kingdom and His righteousness, and all these things will be added to you."

And in the early years, we were getting about $200 a month, which isn't much to cover all the costs. And we would have times of being on our knees and saying, "Lord, You know, we need more to cover the mortgage or whatever, to get some groceries," and then we would pray, "And Lord, if there's anything You're trying to get our attention about, seek first His kingdom and His righteousness." Lord, if we've been distracted or whatever and not listening, help us to hear however we can grow. To serve You better.

And then we would go on campus and serve all day and come back and find a bag of groceries on our doorstep, often. And nobody knew that we were going through this, but we had two months where we didn't go to the store at all. The Lord knew.

And we never missed a meal. And sometimes people would just sense something: we need to bring groceries. And they did. They were following the nudges of the Spirit. We ate some things we had never had before, but we never missed a meal.

I'm thankful we're not living on the edge that way now, but it showed us how tangibly the Lord is watching and caring, because a mortgage payment came down to exactly having, right down to the penny, the amount, including looking up and seeing a hundred-dollar bill through our gate that could have been grabbed from the outside, but someone had left it. And it came to exactly the amount we needed to keep the house. And it was such a tangible reminder that the Lord cares, He sees, He acts, and then it made it easier to trust Him for the less tangible things, seeing Him that clearly in the physical things.

There's so much in that passage, especially if you're in a time when those provisions are not obvious. He cares.

With that, it's the "seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things will be added to you." Actually, in the Sermon on the Mount, the Lord gives us the bottom line when it comes to anxiety. And I think almost all of us had memorized that one and have sung songs about it, and yet we still find at times that anxiety really has a grip and has a hold on us.

I found Philippians 4 to be just a treasure chest of a passage and practical counsel that the Lord gives us for overcoming anxiety, actually step by step. And after we go through this, we'll also take a look at how this relates to step one and how actually we get to apply step one with any text of Scripture and how to benefit.

Let's go to Philippians 4, and we'll start in verse 4. It says, **"Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, rejoice. Let your gentle spirit, or your forbearance, be known to all men. The Lord is near. Be anxious for nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known to God. And the peace of God, which surpasses all mind, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus."**

And verse 6 there is the tie to anxiety: "Be anxious for nothing." And it's really amazing because you look at the passage, and there are all these universal words: "Rejoice in the Lord always. Let your gentle spirit be known to all men. Be anxious for nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication." And speaking on such global terms, at times it can be just overwhelming as we're reading this text.

And Erica has said that "be anxious for nothing" is like saying, "Don't breathe." Right? One can quip, "I'm anxious about being not anxious for anything." But actually the Lord is inviting us to a lot more, and the surrounding passage shows us how we get to learn to be anxious for nothing, but instead receive the peace of God, which guards our hearts and our mind.

Starting in verse 4, actually he starts with the positive, and this is the key: "Rejoice in the Lord always." Paul is at the end of his ministry, and he has experienced so much hardship, and we have some pretty amazing lists in 1 Corinthians and so on of beatings, shipwrecks, being left for dead, sleeplessness, without food. The list is incredible, what he lived through. And he talks about, "The brand marks of Jesus are on my body."

But he is writing from house arrest in Rome. He knows that at some point he'll be called before, guess who, Nero, one of the most despicable people who ever lived, who torched Christians for his garden parties just for fun, and really had it in for Christians. But the Lord wanted to make sure that he had a chance to hear the gospel. And we assume that Paul, because he had appealed to Caesar, actually got to present the gospel to Nero. Maybe it was one of his underlings, we don't know.

But everything was uncertain, how long he would live, what the end-of-life experience would be like. He had much to worry about. And here he is. He loves to be free to share. He's under house arrest. How can he share, talk about the Lord there? The Lord brings people to him, including the Praetorian Guard, Caesar's bodyguard, and they are literally a captive audience, chained to him with shifts every four hours. And I'm sure he was saying, "Guess what? We're talking about Jesus." And at the end of Philippians 4 he says, **"And the saints of Caesar's household greet you."** People had come to the Lord as Paul was sitting there in house arrest because the Lord was bringing people to him.

And instead of being tied in knots with anxiety, as any of us would have been, he had learned what he is now writing here, of how do you handle scary unknown, because he was handling it right and left. And this is what he's learned and writing at the end of his life and ministry. So it's real treasure to learn from.

And the immediate context is interpersonal conflict. Euodia and Syntyche, meaning fragrant and affable, are slugging it out enough that it's making a major disturbance in the Philippian church. And Paul hears about it by ultra-snail mail. The context, when there's interpersonal conflict going on on a major scale that is disruptive, we tend to be pretty anxious about that sort of thing. So the immediate context is interpersonal.

Paul had plenty of circumstantial things to be anxious about too, and this is clearly how he had learned to handle it. And yeah, I love Erica bringing in the context there. I have been in conflict or a major disagreement with friends before, and it's major. It's not being able to eat much, constantly thinking and then analyzing arguments in my head and rehearsing them, and then any indication that the other person gives of anything, then immediately starting to analyze that and trying to understand what it all means and what it all was said and what wasn't said. And you just get your mind churning and churning. Actually, the Lord showed me something really important in one of these major interpersonal conflicts where there was a lot at stake. And what I realized is: because the Lord's with me, I can't lose! Because if things go sideways and I suffer, actually, the Lord knows something about that. And I get insight into His suffering, just a tiny bit of it. And by the way, He suffered as someone who was perfect, whereas in this situation, I had something to do with it. But I get a bit of insight into the depth of His love and all that He lost. And I realized, Lord, if You come through and avert what seemed like disaster to me, then I get to know Your deliverance. And so I realized, "Lord, I can't lose!"

And as my focus turned to Him, the anxiety actually subsided, and actually the Lord quietly said, Allan, you learned what you needed to learn, and now we can actually move on with this. But it was an intense, about two-week period of not eating much and just constantly thinking and pacing and all of that. And the Lord had something really valuable He wanted me to grasp. So it was a special season in the end.

Verse four: **rejoice in the Lord always. Again, I'll say rejoice**. And the question is, what does that mean, and how do we do it? Does it mean that we're just supposed to be singing hymns all day? (Which is wonderful, by the way). But it's actually even deeper than that. Joy is where we are looking for life and the expectation that what I'm currently experiencing is life, or that what will occur is really going to be life. And with rejoicing in the Lord always, it's saying in every situation and at all times, to be looking to the Lord for where life comes from.

And last week, I had a bit of an epiphany when Erica was sharing about those times where she feels restless being really vulnerable times, because those are times where it's easy, if we're not taking charge of it with the Lord, to just coast. And I was considering where that had occurred in my life. And it hasn't been infrequent as a young man and learning to take charge of life by the Spirit gradually more and more. But as I considered what the dynamic was in those times, in those vulnerable times where the flesh is more likely to take over, I realized that coasting is really those times where I'm just tired and I think that this time is for me. And in particular, I'm not looking for life from the Lord.

And it takes an act of active trust to say, Lord, even in this time where I'm tired and I'm a little bit restless, I'm not tired that it's immediately time to go to bed, but I'm sufficiently tired that I feel like I just want some me time. And me time is great. Do it with the Lord, not apart from Him. It's easy to stop looking for life from the Lord in those situations. And as mentioned last week, with everything that we're doing, with every choice that we're making, and this is the dimension one issue, we're looking for life. We're looking to further our sense of what really gives us life, or further the development of things that help us to avoid what is death. And it's like breathing. You're constantly looking for furthering different purposes that result in life or that avoid death.

And when we stop actively receiving the Lord's life, then that's when we begin to erect idols in our hearts, because we begin to look at the circumstances around us and the things that the flesh is telling us and all these different things. And we begin to expect to receive life from those things. And that's very dangerous.

It's at the time where the kings were supposed to go out to battle. David was just chilling at home and surfing on the roof. He got in major trouble. And it's not responding to the Lord, not looking for life from Him, but just hanging out and then opening yourself up to looking for life in all the other places where the Lord hasn't said that's where life is to be found.

Rejoice in the Lord always. This is key because this is the positive statement to which be anxious for nothing is the negative statement. And it's not saying rejoice in the circumstances. This isn't being a Pollyanna of, oh, this is wonderful, and we've had Christians who've told us we need to just say, oh, this is wonderful, this is so wonderful, when it's not at all, tears running down their cheeks, that was trying to somehow make it wonderful. But this is rejoice in the Lord. And as He says in the next verse, the Lord is at hand. He's here. He's just as much here as Alan is next to me. It's just I don't see Him, but He is just as much here. He says, I am with you always, even to the end of the age, the last statement of Matthew. And He is. And I can rejoice in Him, not the circumstances, but in Him because of what He'll do. He is the Redeemer, and that's a very powerful thing as I cultivate that awareness and rejoice with Him.

The Lord is near, and that's our resource, as Erica said, to be able to recognize that He is present in every situation, in every setting that we're in. And I think it was stated last night by Erica that it's hard to turn your focus to someone that you don't have in the picture. And our resource is that the Lord is in the picture, very much so. He's as much of a factor, and more than as much, He's more of a factor than all the things that we're worried about in the situation.

Right. And the opportunity we get is to actually evaluate the circumstances, evaluate the situation with Him as the reference point, rather than with the threat as big and the Lord as really tiny and almost out of the picture.

We've talked about the picture of the telescope turned the wrong direction, where the Lord seems small and the circumstances are huge, and we want to flip that telescope and get back in view the way things really are, that the Lord is immense, and He hears, and He's good, and He acts.

And to do that, I need to have the Lord in view. I can't just say, "Oh, trust God." I mean, how much good does that do you if you're wrestling with somebody and some well-meaning Christian says, "Oh, just trust God"? It doesn't do me very much good. And what I need to do is step back from the circumstances and go to passages that help me get the Lord in view of who He is again, and even collect favorite passages that are go-tos for you when things are tense and tight.

I was even reading Psalm 57 this morning, one of David's psalms in the cave of Adullam when Saul is chasing him, and here David's been anointed king, and he's serving the current king all out. And Saul gets jealous and starts trying to chase him for his life. Read the life of David. It's an amazing story of a man of faith, a man after God's own heart, who's not perfect, and that gives us hope because we're not perfect. But even Psalm 57, David is in the darkness by himself. He's afraid, he's alone, he's overwhelmed, and he goes back and forth in that psalm between the circumstances: they're out to get me, they've laid a net, but the Lord is exalted and I'm hiding under His wings. He goes back and forth in the psalm. It's not all one and then the other. It's back and forth.

At the end, he is praising the Lord, not because he is unrealistic. Again, I've had believers say, "Oh, just say, 'Thank you, Lord. Thank you, Lord. Thank you, Lord.'" And that really doesn't do much. But if I get the Lord in view, who am I trusting? Then I can trust Him.

Even Psalm 23: "The Lord is my shepherd, my good shepherd, and I shall not want." David had gone through a lot of want, but in the deepest sense, no, because the Lord is right there. And even if I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I need fear no evil because You're with me.

Collect favorite scriptures where you see the Lord, and then talk with Him. "Lord, thank You that You're here. I rejoice that even though I am overwhelmed, out of control, I don't know what to do in these circumstances, You are here, and I'm thankful You are. I'm not in this world without hope and without God. How desperate is that? But instead, You are here. You're the Redeemer, and I ask You to redeem, and I trust You for this."

Steve and I have realized that the way we want to pray in times like this is, "I trust You." And it's not just in my head. I'm not just thinking, "Oh, trust God," third person. I'm talking with Him, second person, and I'm rejoicing in Him.

Paul had done that. Paul and Silas, starting the church at Philippi, where they were specifically called by the Holy Spirit to cross over and start spreading the gospel in Europe, it's a very significant move of the Holy Spirit. Then they get beaten up and thrown in prison. And it would be easy to feel like, "What? What was all that about, Lord? You called me here, and now look what happened." And guess what they're doing? They're praying and they're singing hymns. And actually they're living exactly this text with the prayer and the rejoicing in the Lord always. And what they're doing, they're expecting to receive life from the Lord, even in the midst of circumstances where they don't know how it's going to turn out. And they are hurting because they were just beaten miserably, and probably have rats nibbling at their backs and all sorts of horrible things.

It's so powerful what the Lord is saying, offering that we get to learn to walk in with much less dire circumstances, thankfully, in many situations, but then getting to actually come out of being paralyzed to actually partnering with Him. And I love what Erica said about it's not just a mantra. It's not just a, "Lord, thank you, thank you." And there are so many wonderful illustrations of this in the Psalms, but often it starts with the psalmist. And actually, you often even see it in the pronouns that the psalmist use: I, me, my, I, my, my, me, me. And it's about my thoughts and what I'm experiencing.

But they express it to the Lord honestly. And then the Lord gives them a bit of insight. The Lord leads them, and they begin looking backwards. Lord, where have I seen You and Your working in the history of our people? For the Jews and in the Psalms.

And as they're taking one step back from the thing that's threatening them and getting the Lord in view, then they're actually able to put the entire thing into perspective and begin walking with the Lord to address the real issues that are still there.

And that's another part of what you've just mentioned, of how to get the Lord in view. You can't trust someone you don't really have in view.

And another way to do it is to go back to Old Testament and New Testament biographies. Acts is a great one for New Testament, Genesis for Old Testament, David's story in 1 Samuel, where you get to see the Lord at work over the shoulders of others, and also with friends that you're sharing with and get to hear how they've trusted God and what the Lord did in really hard circumstances. And that encourages us to say, yes, Lord, You are here. You are trustworthy, and I entrust this to You. And then I can rejoice instead of just be gripped with fear and anxiety.

Now let's dive in, because that is all the prerequisite to rejoice in the Lord, to know that He's here as much as anything else I have my attention on is. And now, actually, Paul gives us a wonderful step by step, and it actually discloses to us what our mind is for, because anxiety is usually, it's I'm rehearsing this in my mind so much. And Paul is saying, 3 a.m., and the Lord is teaching us through Paul, that's actually not what your mind is meant to do. It's meant for something else. It teaches us what to do in our heart and also what to do with our hands. And let's look at it.

And so it says, in everything, right? And by the way, very important, anxiety in the Greek actually means a "distracting care". And one of the words that it's related to is a word that means to draw in different directions. Basically, it's a distraction. And the question is, a distraction from what? As we've just mentioned, rejoice in the Lord always. That's where Paul starts. Anxiety is a distraction from looking to the Lord for life, walking with Him, being in fellowship with Him. And it's a distraction from it.

And I think that's a very helpful insight because actually, with that in view, there's a lot of ways in which we get anxious and get distracted from the Lord that are beyond the typical ways that we usually associate with anxiety. But actually, it's been helpful as I've stepped back and considered some of those seasons. I've realized actually there is an undercurrent of anxiety behind it, why the thoughts just continuously go in some direction, even if I don't feel anxious, nervous in that way, but the thoughts just keep on going in that direction. And I realized there is something that I'm going for. There is something that's distracting me. And I have found that a helpful diagnostic.

But what's the antidote? What's the solution? It says, in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to the Lord. And it's been helpful to say, if it's worth thinking about, it's worth praying about.

And these three terms, prayer, supplication, and thanksgiving, all seem kind of related, but they're actually distinct. Prayer in the Greek is referring really to the act of orienting yourself to the Lord. And it's an act of the will and of the heart, of saying, instead of having my face smushed into all of the concerns, I am going to remove my face, just so closely looking at the concerns and the uncertainties and the threats, I'm going to remove my attention from there in order to turn my attention to the Lord. And it's not saying these threats and concerns and uncertainties don't exist, but it's saying, Lord, I want to see them with the full perspective, with You in the picture. And it's a turning to Him.

And then supplication is about a petition that arises out of a need, right? And often I turn to the Lord overall because I know that life is found in Him. I know that I don't have a better place to turn. Like Peter said, where else shall we go? You have the words of eternal life, right? But then there are still specific needs that I'm aware of. There are still specific things that I'm aware of that are possibilities that could happen that would have real consequences, right? There are still concrete items there. And the supplication is about being specific in your list to the Lord, recognizing those needs and not just stewing on the need, but lifting it up in prayer, in petition to the Lord, and then, very importantly, with thanksgiving.

And this is instead of saying, "Lord, help," and all these things are threatening, and just staying in that place of panic. The "with thanksgiving" is actually saying, "Lord, I know that even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, it's lurking, but it hasn't hit me yet. And I need fear no evil because You are with me."

And it's because I'm confident of His character, and this is what we were just sharing. Because I have the Lord's character in view, because of what He's already done in my life and how I've experienced Him, because of what He's done in the lives of the saints, both in the Scriptures as well as of others that I know, because of this huge body of evidence that I have, I can give thanks ahead of time for, "Lord, thank You for what You will do. Lord, thank You that You are growing me in the midst of this and teaching me to respond in ways that I didn't know how before," and even baby steps, and just thanking Him that He's accomplishing things through the trial that I wouldn't have signed up for, or through the threat that just seems larger than life, and that I'm learning to trust Him in the midst of this. And that's a treasure that goes with me forever in eternal weight of glory.

That thanksgiving is key. "By prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. Just lift them up to Him.

A couple of notes. I'm a very visual person, and so I've thought of this visually, that the distractions, the anxieties, have me focused solidly away from the Lord. I may have prayed, but it's kind of a, "God, would You please do something while I stew on this?" And it's easy to do that. I know I should pray, so I'll just send off a prayer and then keep stewing as if it depends on me.

And turning from that to putting it in my Heavenly Father's lap. He's right here. He wants to know all about it. He knows about it, but He wants me to tell Him about it and entrust it to Him. And I think of it as actually putting it in His lap and leaving it. Once you've left it, don't take it back again, because it's so easy to do it. Here it is, whoop, take it back again in the next minute. And we'll get how to not do that, what to do instead, in a minute. But it's been a very helpful visual for me of turning from trying to figure it out myself to entrusting it to my Heavenly Father, who is so capable, to my Lord, who is right here, who's a God who loves to hear and loves to act and is good.

And the Lord has reminded me at times when I'm stewing over something, "You know, you could pray about it." Oh yeah, here I teach it, but I don't do it. It's so easy to keep distracted.

And one thing about the supplication, the list being specific, and David is specific in a lot of his Psalms. Psalm 57 is a great example of that. This is going on, but the Lord is going back and forth and then finishing with the Lord, because that's where his focus then stays.

But a lot of people journal, and I do journal, not all the time. I journal more key insights that come at different seasons, and I will journal those so that I can go back to those passages and those insights. But some people journal by being super specific about, "This is what's going on. This is what I feel about it. I'm miserable. I'm mad. I'm depressed, and I should be because this person..." And you end up more depressed and more anxious because now I have it not just in my thoughts, but in writing. Somehow that adds weight to it even more, and I have my face in it.

And instead, what we recommend is maybe note a few phrases about the situation and the date, and ask the Lord for some specific Scripture that applies to this that you can pray from. And then, as He works, a few phrases of what He did and the date. And then you've got a record of God's working according to His promises, not what I want Him to do. I mean, we've searched the Scriptures for, "Lord, you are going to heal me of every physical thing," right? And it's not there. I think all of us have looked.

But He does say He always heals. It's just not always physical. Sometimes it is. I've experienced it. But always He does deeper healing.

The entrusting the details, if my whole focus is I, me, me, me, I, and I stay that way, then I probably won't end up trusting Him with it. But if it's with thanksgiving, "You're here. I know who You are. This is going on. I trust You. Thank You for what You will do. You're the redeemer," then it's like the nation of Israel circling Jericho and shouting praises to God before a single pebble has fallen down. And then the walls come down and they just go straight in. And then in verse seven, the amazing promise, right?

**"And everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God, and the peace of God, which surpasses all comprehension,"** literally it's "surpasses all mind", **"will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus."**

This is one of my favorite promises. And it's not just one where, you do this formula and then it happens, but it's the reality we get to experience while we're going through things that do cause a lot of anxiety. Big presentation, and I don't feel quite prepared, or recent example, it's time to teach, and I don't feel like I prepared as much as I could have, and entrusting it to the Lord. And doing it in specific: Lord, there's this concept that I've been reading in Your word, and You've given me some insight, but it still feels a little bit squishy. Lord, please guide with that one. Please show. And Lord, thank You that it's Your word and that You promise that Your word doesn't go out and come forth empty or void. And please lead.

And often I'm actually learning in the middle of class. Often while Steve or Erica is sharing and teaching, and they're not even teaching on that concept, but just as I'm listening, as well as listening to the Lord, He just gives an insight: "ah, okay, I see."

And many other examples, but just having experienced that, the peace of God guard my heart and my mind. "Guard" is a military term, because those distractions, it is spiritual warfare, and it's guarding my heart, my motivation, and my thoughts in the Lord.

And that little phrase, "the peace of God, which surpasses all mind," is kind of a funny one because you're saying, how can I understand something that surpasses my mind? I'm trying to understand, but it surpasses the mind, so I can't understand. What's helped me is actually to notice verse eight. It ends with, **"Ponder these things"**. Dwell on these things! And I said, "I think I need to use my mind to do that!"

And as I prayed about this text, I suddenly realized, oh, I think I got what Paul is saying. He's saying that to receive the peace of God, it's not a matter of the mind! It's not something that we can analyze and think through very carefully. That process doesn't result in us being able to receive the Lord's peace. But what does it require to receive His peace? It requires, in relationship from our heart, saying, Lord, I choose to turn to You. And Lord, I'm acknowledging that there's a lot that I want to bring before You. And Lord, I'm thanking You because I'm trusting You and Your character, even in the midst of the situation that might be totally new to me and as dangerous or as scary as maybe more than anything I faced before.

But then it's an act of the will from the heart, saying, Lord, I'm bringing it before You. I'm telling You all about it. And Lord, I trust You because of Your character. And that's what opens the floodgates for the peace of God to come to our hearts and to guard our heart and our mind and our thoughts.

And that note, "surpasses all mind," it's not saying that we can't understand the mechanics. It's saying it's not a matter of thinking it through. And then the question is, what is our mind for? I can entrust this to the Lord from the will, from the soul, but then my mind needs something to do. Thankfully, verse eight tells exactly what the mind is to do.

**"Finally, brethren, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is of good repute, if there is any excellence, if anything worthy of praise, dwell on these things,"** or, "ponder these things."

Lord, what have You made my mind for? And there's a list of six: whatever is true, honorable, right, pure, lovely, of good repute. And these are the things that are always true. And what is always true that is, in any situation, true, honorable, right, etc.? It's the Lord Himself. And this is using my mind to focus. And we actually already saw part of this, because part of the thanksgiving process to the Lord is reflecting on and recounting His character. And Paul is here actually highlighting again, the purpose of the mind is to begin to focus on and to get in view because it's always true.

Has the Lord changed? No. It's always true. His goodness, His love, His concern, His eagerness to grow us and to love us and to provide, it's always still in effect, even though I'm not seeing it yet, and in the midst of a world full of people who are not of this character, which can seem threatening. But God, He is the biggest factor in my world and in the circumstances. And this is what he brings, not just a list of another of Paul's wonderful lists, but really meditating on how do I see this in His character and even scriptures that go with it, and importantly, welcoming Him. And it's been amazing at times to think, about the demonized man from the Gospel of Mark with the legion inside of him. And Jesus says a word, and an entire army of demons has to go at one word of His command. And then a bunch of pig herders drive Jesus away because they say He's not welcome. It's amazing the degree to which the Lord honors whether or not we welcome Him in the situation.

As we fix our mind on Him, who is always true and always pure, always lovely in the situation, we are getting to welcome Him in the full breadth of His character as well. And it's an opportunity for what we get to do with our mind.

And then at the end of the list, there are two if statements: if there is any excellence, if anything worthy of praise. And often in any situation, the first thing we notice is the problem. And little thanksgiving for what is going right. It's just, what's the next thing that needs to be fixed? What's the next thing that needs to be solved? What's the thing that's rotten that all my focus is turned towards? And we're oriented to thinking that way.

Steve, who went through Stanford Biz School years ago, said there's a form of terrible management called management by exception. And it's by noticing everything that's wrong and commenting on it and putting out the fires instead of encouraging what's right. And yes, acknowledging what needs to change, but that not being the totality. And it's easy for us. We're all trained in analysis, and it's easy to focus on what's wrong.

I've used the analogy: back in the '50s, there were these big, ugly, to my mind, Easter hats that women wore to church on Easter. They were these big floral decoration things. It was hard to see through the forest of them. I remember them when I was growing up at the Episcopal church. If someone was wearing one of these creations, but there's a big hole right in the middle, where does your entire attention go? To what's wrong, and to that hole. You don't even notice parts that may actually be beautiful.

So that if any excellence, if anything worthy of praise, Lord, thank You for where You're already at work, where this person has, if they're a believer, or even not a believer, where they've done some good things, some godly things. Because if I'm angry at them, really upset by what they're doing, my entire focus goes there instead of, "Thank You, Lord, help me to see where they are growing, where what they are reflecting is the Lord or one of His characteristics". As I notice that, that's part of my joining the Lord to be redemptive in a bad situation instead of just focusing on what's wrong and trying to control it.

For me, instead, how can I join You, Lord, with Your character, which You've put in me by the Holy Spirit, to see where You're already at work, to fan the flames of that, to encourage it and rejoice in it and build common ground with that other person, if that other person's a believer, or even not, appreciating where the image of God is visible even though they're not believers yet?

It's that those two endings, if anything excellent, if anything worthy of praise, are really important. It's easy to only focus on what's wrong and threatening. And that difference in focus, actually, I think at the root of anxiety is the question, what am I going to do about it? When we turn to identifying where the Lord is already working, the question then turns to, what are we going to do about it? How can I join You, Lord, in what You're already doing? There's so much freedom in that because there is a clear recognition that there are many factors that are out of my control, but they're not out of His control. They're not out of Your control, Lord. Given that, now what are You inviting me to do as a response?

And that's exactly where Paul goes in the next verse, verse nine: the things that you have learned and received and heard and seen in me, practice these things, and the God of peace will be with you. You see this wonderful kind of almost play on words. In verse seven, it's the peace of God, it's God's peace that we receive. And in verse nine, we're joining Him to be bringing peace to others.

There was another example, compare and contrast, in this passage, which was the two let statements. In verse five it says, "Let your forbearance be known to all men". And then in verse six it says, "Let your requests be made known to God". I mused that we often get it exactly reversed. We let all of our requests be made known to everyone around us because we're anxious, we've got to be in control, and we're actually not praying about it. So we're not letting our requests be made known to God. We're restrained in our approach to the Lord in that we're not even talking to Him! We have the opportunity to get the right mail to the right recipient, to let a request be made known to the Lord so that we have His forbearance, His gentleness to offer to other people, so that we're not adding to the problem, but actually stepping back to Him and seeing how we can be part of His redeeming work in whatever it is that's going on.

So back in verse nine: **"The things that you've learned, received, heard, and seen in me."** And often for anxiety, it's because it's a situation that is substantially new, right? If the situation is routine, you generally know what to expect, and generally you're not that anxious. But because it's a situation that's new, the Lord has given us the gift of many forerunners ahead of us who show us and inspire us: here is how you can respond in a situation with this type of threat.

And we see that in the lives of other believers. We see that, of course, in the lives of the saints in Scripture. We see that in the life of Paul, see that in the life of our Lord. And again, how do you remember? How do any of these things come to mind? That's what our mind is for. It's to analyze and understand, Lord, where are You? Who are You, and where are You in this, and how might You already be working? And then, Lord, where have You worked in similar situations in the past, and how did You work through other saints who were really responding to You with courage, with Your peace, with hope, and with compassion?

I get to gain vision from others, from the Lord and from others. And each of us can give that vision to others. Whereas I trust the Lord for difficult, scary, overwhelming situations, I then can become a forerunner for others, showing the way as well as sharing the way. And we learn from one another.

I want my life to be one that others can learn from. Not that I'm perfect, and it's a good thing I'm not, because nobody is. If I were perfect, they'd say, "Oh, if I'm perfect, then no wonder." But I'm not, and they see that, and they gain hope that I too can trust the Lord, even though I'm still growing, and be part of His redemptive working instead of just reacting or trying to be in control for me.

We see this beautiful arc through this passage, where we start with being anxious and paralyzed, not responding to the Lord, not really communicating much with Him, if at all, to turning to Him as an act of the will, not because it's rational, quote unquote, but because of my relationship with Him. Then the specific concerns, the things that are tending to grab my attention, even after I've turned to You overall, present those to Him. Be specific. Share them with Him. And then the peace, the Lord's peace, floods our heart and our mind. It guards our heart and our mind.

I've now received the Lord's peace, which isn't a matter of thinking it through. Now what do I get to do with my mind? I get to identify, I get to remember, Lord, who You are and who You've always been, and contextualize that to my current situation, and get deeper insight into who You are because of this trial that I'm currently going through.

Then to identify, Lord, where are You already working? Lord, I don't want to be trying to work in an area where I don't see You already working. I want to be in lockstep with You. Lord, please show me where I can begin by showing me where there's evidence of Your speaking to others or of Your redeeming. Then finally, learn from Jesus, learn from other saints, how to actually respond.

And the result is we've moved from total paralysis to receiving the Lord's peace, to getting the Lord very much in the picture with our mind, and now to being able to act with compassion, with courage, with faith, with hope, even with joy, even before the circumstance or the threat has been removed. It says, "The God of peace will be with you." Basically, at this point, we're now free to really join the Lord, heart, mind, and body.

It's a really amazing and practical and hope-filled passage. When we're anxious and paralyzed, we want to do something, and this is showing us what we can do that actually is redemptive instead of making the situation worse, which we tend to do if we're just reacting and trying to control it ourselves. We make a bigger mess for Jesus to have to clean up. But here I'm stepping back to Him. I'm joining Him in what He's doing, bringing His character, and I'm bringing the God of peace to that other person, to that situation. Before I received the peace of God; now I bring the God of peace there.

And it goes with the end of Romans 12: **as far as it's possible with you, be at peace with all men**. I can't control the other person, but I can influence them by what I bring to the situation. We actually, decades ago, had a faculty staff Bible study and a senior Stanford Hospital administrator showed up who was a believer, and when we taught this passage, he got excited about it because his biggest job was reconciliation among the big egos over at Stanford Hospital and Research Center, where there was plenty of conflict with these big, important people who would vie with each other, and he would be called in to bring reconciliation.

And he taped this in the back of his Bible. Steve did a cartoon of it, and he taped it to the back. A couple of years later, he came back to us and he said, "This has been practically helpful in what to do when I'm dealing with these types of conflict." It's very practical.

And I guess with this anxiety issue, now we've looked through Philippians 4, and what is the Lord's wisdom for how to deal with anxiety? And then the question is, what does this have to do with step one? And step one, as we've been talking about in these last weeks, is what conceptual images have I allowed to reign in my life, have I allowed to act as king, to have sovereign life-and-death control over my life? This is a huge array of things, but classic examples are, I need to get into a good college. I need to get a job that makes others think something of me. I am this awesome being, so capable. And there's a huge variety.

And as it pertains to anxiety, what is the source of many of the distracting cares we have? Sometimes the Lord is actually getting our attention that maybe this thing that you've been relying on and putting the weight of your life on to experience real life actually isn't where life is found. And we talked about with these conceptual images, or as Scripture calls them, idols, these idols demand sacrifices from us, and they demand that we serve them. And we identify that those are the lusts, those are the compulsions that we have. That's all from Romans 1, the downward spiral.

And we identified there are a number of common compulsions that our conceptual images demand of us, right? When they're threatened, we sometimes get angry, or we get anxious, or we get fearful, or we get depressed if it looks like it's never going to happen, or bitter if I was planning on this and now it's not going to happen.

Anxiety is one of those classic indicators that, Lord, is there something that I'm counting on that actually You didn't say is actually sufficient to put the weight of my life on? And that's often very helpful because once I've identified it, that can take a lot of the heat out of why do I keep on having my mind return to this over and over again. And it's awesome because, with the whole prayer and supplication with thanksgiving and then focusing our mind on the Lord, we're getting opportunities to identify, oh, is this thing that I'm counting on actually pleasing to You? And maybe it is, but I'm demanding it now. And we've talked about that. I want my family to always be harmonious, and it's not, and I'm tipping the card over right away because I'm upset because it's not.

But even good things that are made absolutes, then we're worrying if it seems threatened or is not happening, or I'm angry, or I'm bitter. My health has gone south, and I was counting on, I didn't realize it till it went bad, I was counting on good health. And now it looks like that's not going to be, and it's very easy to get bitter because that was part of a good life. Good things, but made absolutes. What I have to have for life to be good, to be successful, to be happy. We load a lot into specific scenarios.

We've been talking about a series of them that are kind of earmarkers that alert us that there's something that I've absolutized. And that causes a lot of conflict because what you absolutize and what I do is different. And of course, what I absolutize is right. It has to be, by definition. The situation's right if we do it this way.

For us as believers, rather than just being, okay, that's what's happening. Instead, they become earmarkers, diagnostics for us. Is there something, Lord, that I have made too important, that I am trying to get life from, when really You're the only life-giver? It may be a gift from You, but it's not what to live for and die for and get depressed over and anxious over and get angry over if it looks like it's not going to happen.

These are very helpful diagnostics for us to say, Lord, where else in the pantheon in my heart is there something that I have made too important? Doesn't mean it's not good. It may be very good, but it's not that important. And You're the important thing. And it's in the step one. It's instead of presenting my members to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, presenting myself to the Lord as those alive from the dead, and my members to Him as weapons of righteousness.

There are those idols that are actually not good, that don't please the Lord, and we get the opportunity to throw those out and replace them.

And then there are those that we've made absolute, and the Lord invites us to put Him back on the throne and at the apex of what we're counting on for life, and to order the other things below that, which can be hard. But actually, that's where life is found. And we see that in this Philippians 4 as well.

And we talked last week out of Ephesians 4 about recognizing these old patterns, renouncing it in prayer, being renewed by the spirit of your mind. Lord, what do You call me to replace this with that is in scripture so I know where to go, not just what to put off? Just putting off isn't enough. I need to know, because otherwise I'll go back to it. But I need to know, what do I go to? What do I replace it with? And then prepare to do that and trust Him to start making those steps of trusting Him to do it. So it's not just behavior change. It's trusting Him to join Him in walking His way.

And I think it was a Ray Stedman sermon that I listened to where he said the walk of a believer is always two steps. It's put off, put on, put off, put on. And with that, actually, it ties into how we get to apply step one with just about any text of scripture that we look at.

And we've been focusing primarily on here are the symptoms that alert me that there may be something that I've elevated to the level of idolatry in my life. And that's kind of starting from the symptom, right? Because I feel compelled in all these ways, and I notice that because it takes a toll on me and other people around me. And that's noticing that I may be in error and then looking to the scriptures for truth and then going before the Lord in prayer as a matter of the will and exchanging it, presenting myself to Him and renouncing the old and presenting myself to Him.

But actually, you'll notice that it's always these two. There's what I've allowed to be at the apex of my life, and then there's what the Lord says I can actually count on. And all change is when we have both of those in view and we renounce the old and walk in the new.

And actually, when we're in any scripture, we get the opportunity to say, Lord, where do You say life is from this passage, from this text? And even if it's not at all a prominent issue in your life at the moment, being able to say ahead of time, Lord, right, when I'm in situations where life from You is called into question, Lord, I want to know ahead of time that this is where real life is found.

And we don't have to wait for the compulsions of idolatry to fester and to get really major until we address them with the Lord. But the Lord gives us the benefit of all of His word, and the truth is available to us already. And we actually get to replace that idolatry with the truth of what the Lord tells us, and with His life instead. We get to nip it in the bud before it gets ugly. It's a lot nicer to do it that way. But we do a mix, and both are good.

That's part of how the Lord causes all things to work together for good for us who love Him and are called according to His image and conforms us to the image of His Son so that we glorify, we show Him forth. It's Romans 8:28 through 30.

But when we don't do it His way, the bad taste, the results, are a strong urge to listen to Him next time and learn how to do it with Him. Where we do trust Him to do it right, it's an encouragement to keep going. It's really both. And I'd much rather learn just straight from reading in the word and saying, Lord, how can I apply this? And you can make major headway doing that. But it will be a mix because we're definitely not in heaven yet. We're a mixed bag of the flesh and spirit. But we get to take charge of the flesh.

And I think it has been really helpful to recognize that the three dimensions with the three steps, I get to actually ask the Lord how to apply them when I'm in a given text before I'm even aware of something really major going on. And it's just been helpful as a way, if you will, to store up the grain in the season of abundance so that I'm prepared for when it seems like it's a season of famine.

Years ago, when Steve was on the edge of death in a coma in Stanford Hospital, it was actually pouring rain in California. And as I was coming and going to the ICU, I remember the Lord reminding me "The one who hears My word and acts on it is like the one who builds his house on the rock. And when, not if, the rains come and the winds blow, that house will stand firm because it's built on the rock."

But the one who basically hears My word and blows it off, when those storms of life come, the house of his life will fall because he's been building on the sand. And so it's a reminder: I want to keep actively moving into who I already am, which is what the encouragement is. I'm not trying to become what I'm not. The Holy Spirit is there. This word is written on my heart. I get to trust Him to grow into who I am more and more.

So these have been some examples of step one and the diagnostics to realize that the step is needed.

But we'll now be taking two weeks off. Next week is Stanford finals week, and then the following week is Stanford break week. So we will take a two-week break, and then we will be back the first Wednesday of April, and Steve will be back. So then we will start into step two of how to change, with lots of examples. So hopefully this is really practical. I encourage you to go back where we've been and ask the Lord to show you, "How can I grow out of this? Where can I apply this and not just fill my head with more theology, but actually live this out with You?

And as you do that, you will be blessed, and so will the people you impact. And the Lord will be blessed.

Let's pray, and then we can gladly fellowship and hang out.

> Lord Jesus, thank You so much that You are here, that You're with us in every setting and every circumstance and at all times. Lord, thank You that, as the hymn says, everywhere that man can be, Lord, You are present there. And Lord, that is such a comfort and such an encouragement.

> And Lord, we ask that we would avail ourselves of Your presence, that we wouldn't just know about it, but, Lord, that we would experience it. Thank You for that invitation that's always there. Lord, thank You that when we turn to You, You don't say, "It was about time," but You just love us and rejoice in us like the father that saw the son, the prodigal son, returning home.

> Lord, we thank You for all the settings where we get to learn to trust You and come out of the cloud of anxiety that so often covers us. Lord, thank You that it's all training to grow into learning to partner with You in uncomfortable situations and uncertain ones, and to learn to recognize Your presence in every place in order to bring Your peace to those around us and have so much joy as we do and as we look and see what You will do and what You are doing.

> Lord, thank You for all the forerunners ahead of us: Your life, Lord, and the lives of the saints in the Scriptures, and the many whom we know who've courageously walked with You in faith and with thanksgiving and even in joy in the most unlikely of circumstances. Lord, thank You for how they encourage us and inspire us and teach us, give us vision for how to walk with You and to be walking in Your victory no matter where we are.

> Lord, we ask that You would teach us and grow us in walking in this week and in the weeks to come. And Lord, that it would be a wonderful thing that we get to share with others, that it would encourage and bring life in others as well.

> Lord, we're so thankful for this time. We pray this in Your name. Amen.