> O Lord, thank You so much for the wonder of being Yours. We do thank You for this country and how amazingly high the level of living that many in this country do live, even without being in upper echelons. But Lord, thank You that above all, our citizenship is with You, that You are our King and our guide.

> And Lord, we stand in wonder as we, now in Easter week, focused on toward Good Friday and then toward the resurrection, we stand in awe that You who created the cosmos as well as this earth, that You would leave Your glory to come and become a human being on this earth with all of its brokenness and all the deep hurts in people's lives, and to willingly reach out while being subjected to rejection and mocking and even death for us.

> Lord, Your love, You see our need. And You've left us to death and back. And we're so thankful to be Yours. Lord, please speak to each of us tonight. Use tonight as part of Your preparation for Easter. And Lord, may we give You joy by walking more and more closely with You, truly doing so, and walking in alignment with You so that we bring You to the people in our lives.

> Thank You for the high calling and the high purpose that You give us. And Lord, may we rest in You and walk more and more truly according to Your heart and be part of Your work in a broken world. Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.

Thank you for your prayers.

While I was up in Washington, as you know, I went up two weeks earlier than we would normally have gone up for spring break because of a dear friend's memorial service up there, Ross Hamilton's, known as the Ansel Adams of Olympic. He did for Olympic National Park in color what Ansel Adams did in black and white with Yosemite. And I thought that's so appropriate because since Yosemite is all granite, your subject matter is all grayscale, most of it. And black and white was just the ideal medium for it.

Ross did the same in color. He loved to hike. He loved the outdoors. He would say of that time, point blank, he didn't like people. Loved the Lord, loved His creation, told the Lord's story through slideshows. So there are 600 miles of hiking trails there, and he packed a large format camera into the woods, not because he really was excited about photography. He did phenomenal photography, but because he wanted to share the beauty of the Lord's creation with others, and initially just to put on slide shows at church and stuff.

And then people said, "Hey, you got to get this out there, actually." So the Park Service uses a lot of his pictures on their postcards and stuff. You go to the visitor's center, a lot of it is Ross Hamilton stuff, and various other people who have tried to copy the style and so forth.

Our favorite hiking trails that we like to take the girls on were ones that Ross had identified for us. It was very special. In recent years, as Erica and I have spent more time up there, we've gotten to be very good friends with Kathy, whom he married when he was in his late 70s, having never planned to marry.

I like to tell the story of how they got married. They were good friends. They'd known each other most of their lives, and they liked to hike. One time they hiked out somewhere, they were having a picnic, and in the course of conversation Ross at one point said, "When we're married," and Kathy said, "Is that a proposal?" And he said, "I guess it is." Their wedding was the huge event of the church.

We will continue to see Kathy and continue that friendship. It was very special being up there for it. Erica couldn't be there because she couldn't travel yet. But the Lord engineered the timing just right, that I was able to travel. Erica didn't need to have me still here, just in time to be up there on Erica's birthday for Ross's memorial.

The Lord really used the time. Thank you for your prayers for my study time and preparation to write more of this material that the Lord's opened up and that we've had the privilege of sharing on the campus and more recently to you alumni and friends, courtesy of the internet.

We talked, by the way, at one point early on, we were teaching and we were wanting to start recording. I had suggested an audio with at least a cameo of the two of us as we were teaching, and I was told, "Oh, you dreamer. You're talking about streaming video. Don't count on it. That's pretty much not going to happen in your lifetime." Here we are.

The Lord did a lot in that time, but the thing that was most prominent is what we'd like to share with you tonight, and that is while we noted that, Paul's statement of purpose in his introduction at the beginning of Romans, and in the first of the series of four books on Romans and on the message of the heart of Romans.

The first book, this is right there at the beginning (that was 15 years ago when we did that), but it did not have the understanding of the implications of a two-word phrase in the Greek text. And the Lord used this time while I was up there, and I had a lot of time with Him, to open up implications of this. I will not say the implications of it, because I'm sure there are plenty more that may emerge during my lifetime.

Paul, in Romans 1:5, in introducing himself, **"through whom we received grace and apostleship to bring about obedience of faith among the Gentiles, among the nations, the non-Jewish people, for His name's sake."** We had, and these books were written, how to change, basically how to obey the instructions in God's Word. But hadn't really caught this.

The phrase occurs again at the end of Romans. Paul did consider this really important. It's really the bookends of Romans. Romans 16:25, that He was **able to establish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery which has been kept secret for long ages past, but now is manifested by the Scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the eternal God, has been made known to all the nations forever, to obedience of faith.**

So what is obedience of faith? We tend to read over this as we read Romans. At the beginning, we read over, we see this in the middle of Paul saying who he is and how delighted he is to get to share things with them. And we get to obedience, and the flesh says, don't need that, not interested. Go right to the next word, faith. Check. Been there, done that, got that. All taken care of. And thereby, we read right on and miss the point of what Paul says is the whole point of Romans. Not just the whole point of Romans, but the whole point of his ministries: obedience of faith.

Obedience, yes. God loves us enough to have given us extensive instructions in how to live life successfully and fruitfully, and to relate to others fruitfully, and to live lives that are really full of real life, eternal life, and that impart life to others. But what is this? The key is obedience of faith.

And faith, belief, two different English words we use for the same term, depending on context. But because I realized the essence, the root of this term faith, believe, in the Greek text is to be persuaded, to be convinced. And the key here is that this is obeying not because these are the rules, not because of the fear of the consequences of being a bad kid or of munging it in life, and with tragic consequences, which we generally just don't fathom at all as we make a decision of what to do.

And with the tragedy of the airliner that was landing at LaGuardia, and a fire truck pulled up out across the runway right at the critical moment, and the aircraft crashed into the fire truck, killing both pilots immediately. But what I think of as I read on the radio thing, there were three voices, and they were not actually talking to each other. But the one phrase, or quick statement, in there was a voice saying, "I just messed up." And we think, okay, disobedience, yeah, yeah, I messed up. But we generally don't think that it really makes much of any difference.

And then there's something simple like that, simple in terms of the logistics, but catastrophic in terms of the consequences. A plane that was getting ready for takeoff, somebody had smelled some smoke, and they called to have the airport fire department come out and check it before they let that plane take off. And the fire truck had to cross runways. And I've listened to the communications, pull up to this-number ramp, pull up and hold between the runners, really critical, hold between the runners. And that would have been the instruction that somehow the fire director was told to proceed.

And we think of that, whether we obey the Lord, obey His instructions, we tend to think most of the time that doesn't make much difference. It's a good idea to obey, but we often have no real idea of the implications of what we are choosing for and choosing against.

But this "obedience of faith": the emphasis is less about obedience. It is talking about obedience, but I think the real significance of that phrase is why we obey. And I think this really gets down to the essence of God's plan in creating us in His image and commissioning us to rule, that is, to manage and to, as He does, make management decisions and bear real responsibility, and make decisions with real consequences, and engage in actions with real consequences. And when you look at the implications of giving us that, basically, of giving us free will that we decide, and when we comply with God's instructions, it's because we have become convinced that it's to our benefit and the benefit of others to do so. But in the meantime, we do tremendous damage.

And we get to see this in little children who don't understand the implications of why they should do this or that that daddy and mommy say to do, and why they shouldn't do this or that that daddy and mommy say they shouldn't do.

We had friends who had twin boys, and the boys had a wonderful pastime, and that was to go around the house doing all the things they were told not to do while reciting the rules. They were singing the rules while breaking them, delighting in the fun of breaking the rules. But it's also just out of ignorance.

Back in the early days of personal computers, when a floppy drive had a storage capacity of 56,000 bytes, 56K, the drive cost $100. And we had a student come in just in time to see their, I don't know, two-, three-year-old gleefully just about to squeeze the tube of toothpaste into the floppy drive, having fun, trying things out, no idea of the implications.

But the thing that really came through with this is the importance that God attaches to our obedience being by faith, being because we are convinced, basically because we have decided that that which is God's will is also our will, not just because it's God's will, not because you better do what God says, but because we have concluded that this is really right. This is what will lead to success. This is what will develop wonderful, loving, life-filled relationships, and realized this is about creating us in His image, wanting us to cooperate the same way the members of the Godhead cooperate with each other.

They don't sit around debating, should we do my will or should we do your will? I firmly believe that how you can have three persons and yet one God is that the essence is they have one and the same will. Each one has a specific portfolio having to do with the three dimensions of everything that God does, including the creation: purpose, deliberate intentional purpose; functional execution in practice, doing things in practice that further the purpose and lead to attaining the goal, the objective; and then blessing others with the result.

You have the spiritual dimension, the dimension of purpose, objective, calling. You have the functional dimension. And you have the relational dimension, and God does everything that way.

And the three steps of how to change that we're looking at, that Paul has explained in the heart of Romans, is those three steps. The first one, which we've already looked at before the break, was as a matter of will, of my deciding, not your will, not what we have been doing, and not what leads to all of the conflict in the world, not your will but mine be done. But when we recognize that life really happens with respect to the right person, not my will but yours be done.

So that's the first thing, has to do with will.

Next week, we will start to launch into what Allan promised for tonight, but we're not doing until next week, getting into the how do we make it happen in practice? What do we do? How do we then change our behavior, habitual lifestyle? How do we change the way we do things, the way we say things, and so forth? How do we change that from what has been established to what will not fulfill the new purpose that we've embraced, but change it to that which does fulfill that? How do we do that?

And then the relationship, which then comes entering into the relationship of functioning as a son of God, managing the inheritance that God has given us in order to please Him, the obedience of faith, because I want to please Him.

I realized during the five weeks that I was gone that this really is very foundational, which the fact that Paul mentions it in his introduction and his conclusion indicates that he thought so too. It's like 1 John, where he says in several places, I've written this so that you may know, that Jesus is God and that you are His. And that's his point.

And this is Paul's point with Romans, of helping us to the fullness of the obedience of faith and what it is. And understanding what it is is so helpful to getting there, that it's not, oh no, it's the rules, and it's just because I believe in God, I believe He's there. And it's not, I believe God, but I still do what I want, which means that I believe in theory but not in practice.

But here it's the essence of, I know that Your will, Lord, is where all goodness lies for me and for those I impact. And I trust You to align myself with You because that is, "You are the way, the truth, and the life, and what You describe as Your way that You enable is the way to go. That's the way to live. That's wise living.

I went back and went through Scripture and searching out key phrases to see how this runs through Scripture.

And we really see it first with the giving of the Ten Commandments. We see it in Exodus 20 and in Deuteronomy 5 and the parallel passages, and the warning against idolatry, the warning against seeking life from anything other than the Lord. It was the sole giver of life, and the warning is not to worship or serve images of any life in anything other than the Lord.

And He says the reason is because I'm a jealous God. Now people read that and say, oh yeah, all pushing self-interest. No, that's what we think of as jealousy in a fallen world because we're examining the phenomenon in sinful practices. But He's talking about jealously protective of My beloved, My treasure.

Visiting the iniquity. The iniquity is the deviance, the bent to go off. Of course, I did a little archery as a boy, and back then it was wooden shaft arrows, and no wooden shaft is perfectly straight. And you had to get to know each individual arrow and how much it's going to veer off course, both because of the bent of the shaft and the way the natural feathers used to fletch the arrow to guide it. And you had to get to know each arrow so you could compensate when you aim.

But again, the term for sin. Both the Hebrew of the Old Testament and the Greek of the New Testament have plenty of terms for failure and negativity and whatever sort. But interestingly enough, the key terms for failure with respect to the Lord is sin, an archery term meaning to miss the target.

And when we get to Romans 3:23, which we did comment on earlier in the winter quarter, we noted that Romans 3:23 says, **for all sin**... And it's an aorist. It does not specify when. It's a unique form that we mentioned at various times in the Greek that every other language I know of, but I don't know that many languages in the grammar, when you, every verb has to specify when. It has to give a... And that's why we talk about tense, the tense aspect of a verse. Tense just means time. So what's the time information in the particular form of the verb apart from the meaning of the word itself? But the aorist, which literally means without horizon, there's no time limits on the aorist.

Romans 3.23, most translations will say all have sinned. That's true, but you missed the point. All sin, have sin in the past, sin routinely in the present, will continue to sin in the future. Now we do things about it. That's what this whole how to change is about. But Romans 3.23, **all sin and fall short of the glory of God**. Even if our aim were perfect, we don't have the power to make it to the target, and the target is that we display God Himself. To glorify God is to radiate the reality of who He is, to express His life such that people look at us, and they get a clear, accurate picture of who God is.

And that's what the incarnation was all about, was after all of the telling, explaining of the Old Testament. Then God said, as an instructor, professor, high school teacher, whatever, let Me show you. I've been describing this. It's not familiar to you. It seems kind of mysterious. Let Me show you what I mean.

Visiting the iniquity, the bent that causes people to veer off course, the deviant nature, and the third and fourth generation of those who hate Me, but showing loving kindness, which is His love that causes Him to be utterly faithful to His covenant, to what He promises us, showing loving kindness to thousands.

And we immediately think thousands of people. No. When we get to Deuteronomy 7, verse 9, we have a parallel statement that He's a faithful God who keeps His covenant and His loving kindness to a thousand generations with those who love Him and keep His commandments.

And this is showing up. This is like the general inspecting the troops, and they know that there are going to be big changes. He's not going to look at everything and say, oh, everything is perfect. He's not.

And I had a fun experience for this in high school. I was director of the school band, and there was a time when there was not enough enrollment in ROTC. So it was decided that the boys in the band, the girls couldn't, but the boys, we had a new class, advanced band ROTC, and the boys in advanced band, regular class, would register. They didn't have to, but most of them did, would register for advanced band ROTC, swell the numbers of enrollment, but we weren't going to have any association with the ROTC program, with the military program.

Then it came time for the national US Army inspectors to come and inspect the Lowell High School ROTC thing. We asked, would the band, would the male members of the band come out and play at the inspection and so forth. I was assured the inspectors will not inspect the band. You don't have to worry. Just be there. And great.

What happens? They finish the inspection, and I'm standing there in front of the band. Out of the corner of my eye, I see somebody walking up, and I see the inspection team with the head inspector walking right over up to me. And I thought, this is going to be interesting. Not going to be involved in the inspection. Let's see. So he stepped up and he said, "The inspection team just wants you to know that we think the band really made the inspection for the battalion."

Anyway, the Lord does have to address the sin in our lives because we pass it on. We affect other people. And He talks about to the third and fourth generation. It's because He sees the same tendencies show up in a family line one generation after another. It may be a flip-flop. It may be an extreme reaction to what you grew up with, and you're never going to experience again, so you do the opposite. And then they do the opposite. But the reference point is still what showed up in that family line.

And typically, counselors see this pattern. There are two basic patterns. There's just the continuous propagation of the same thing, generation after generation after generation, termed generational sins. And then there is the flip-flop, which is still generational sin, but it's A in this generation, in reaction to not A, so we'll call it B in the next generation. And then they react against B, and so they're back to A. So the point here is because the Lord cares about our impact on others. Human beings are capable of so much hurt toward each other, and we all have done it in various ways. That's what the sin is that He takes that seriously, because what we do deeply affects others, whether it's within the family or just people we influence that are close to us.

When we're in alignment with the Lord, we can bring so much of His life, and that's the good news. I can break the generational sin in my life so that it doesn't propagate. And that is the hope and the invitation from the Lord, not to just live passively and keep reacting in the flesh.

And also, there's an answer to that: "I'm not hurting anybody else." Oh, yes, you do. Even just those you influence. You may not be hurting anyone directly by what you're doing, but you're teaching others, and most significantly within the family, but it happens outside the family too, as we all know.

Deuteronomy 11, **"If you are careful to keep all this commandment,"** and keep doesn't just mean do it. It's not just another term for obey. I did a huge study on that too many years ago. And the keep is to safeguard, to treasure up, to protect. And this phrase is, let's see, this verb occurs to keep all this commandment, which is commanding you to do it. And it shows up two ways, keep to do, and sometimes keep and do. So keep doesn't just mean obey. It's what leads to it. And I think it is basically what the step one of change that we looked at in last quarter, the "not my will, but Yours be done." That's my commitment: to accept it, embrace it, internalize it, and to say this is where goodness is and that's where I choose to walk. That's the prayer. I'm treasuring it up. That's the prayer of having become convinced, having become persuaded, that what the Lord tells me in His word is actually the words of life. And therefore, that's what I will do. That's what I will pursue.

And He says to do it, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all His ways, to hold fast to Him. So to love Him is to treasure Him, to really... Words are just inadequate to appreciate Him, to respect Him, to value Him, to see that He embodies what I'm looking for, to love Him, to walk in all His ways. That's practical, acting on it, and to hold fast to Him or cling to Him.

This is the same term that is used in Genesis 2. **"A man shall leave his father and mother and cleave or cling to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh,"** meaning that their two lives will express what an individual life cannot. They will become one flesh. They will become one message of the good news from the Lord, which is what the verb "to flesh" in Hebrew is all about. It's proclaim news, and almost always to proclaim good news. And that's the two becoming one flesh, is that the two of them together, which can express the love relationship between them as no individual can possibly express, glorifies God in particular ways.

This is to hold fast to Him, to cling to Him. And that's also illustrative of the beauty of the intimate marriage embrace and the wife clinging in love as they're celebrating their marriage to her husband, delighting in, among other things, the impartation of his seed of life into her so that it will combine with her and reproduce their life, very much his life but also hers in and through her, so If you are careful to keep this commandment, which I'm commanding you to do, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all His ways, to hold fast to Him, then the Lord will drive out all these nations from before you.

People who are opposed to the Lord, they weren't wiped out because God didn't like them. They were wiped out because they had committed themselves to fight against what the true God is and stands for. And that is the change that Paul is describing in Romans. It's for us to drive out the activity of the flesh in us, which, as we get in Romans 8, is hostile toward God, does not obey Him, cannot obey Him, and cannot please God.

To drive that out of our lives, we come to the Lord recognizing that naturally our bodies are indwelt by sin, and the sin in our bodies tries to induce us to fight against God and disobey Him and do what's displeasing to Him. And the change involves our subduing the flesh and ruling in our own body in spite of the opposition in it. And that's the parallel to the nation of Israel taking up rule over the promised land, the geopolitical territory that God was giving them.

And Deuteronomy 30 brings us, verse 16, in another aspect: **"command you today to love your Lord God, walk in His ways, keep His commandments and His statutes, His ordinances,"** The commandments are the principles, the statutes are the practical action, and the ordinances or judgments are interpersonal relationships, that you may live and multiply, and that the Lord your God may bless you in the land you're entering to possess it.

And we talk about the three steps of change, the three steps of God developing anything and everything He goes about. Whether it's in Genesis 1, developing the physical world, it's always three steps of development, and then an ongoing consequence that goes on indefinitely, indefinite propagation, so that you may live and multiply in this text. And in Romans, you have the three steps of change, the third being in Romans 8, and then you have the three chapters of discussion of that.

God has not withdrawn His love from Israel. They are in a period of rejecting Him, but if they turn back to Him, He will welcome them with open arms. And then the warning on the end: and by the way, if you do the same, the same will happen to you.

And then comes Romans 12, which begins with, **"Present your bodies, a living and holy sacrifice, well-pleasing to the Lord."** So what are we talking about now? That's talking about the ongoing development. Romans 12 begins the discussion of outworking in relations with others, but presents the sacrificial servant love for others. That's not a step. That's a lifestyle. That's the ongoing lifestyle that results from and propagates indefinitely as a result of taking the practical steps of change to move from life according to the flesh to life according to the Spirit.

And we continue to get this. Joshua, at the end of his life, after leading them into the land (Joshua 22:5): **"Be careful to observe the commandment, and the law which Moses, the servant of the Lord, commanded you, to love the Lord your God, walk in all His ways, keep His commandments, hold fast to Him, serve Him with all your heart and all your soul."**

And then in the captivity, Nehemiah, crying out to the Lord, confesses that they haven't done this. And he's crying out to the Lord. And then Daniel, in Daniel 9, if you want to look at that or make a note on it, that's Nehemiah 1, starting at verse 5. And then Daniel 9, Daniel expended prayer to the Lord, confessing that Israel has forsaken the Lord and not followed His covenant, but reminding the Lord that He said that would happen, but promised that if they repented while they were captive to the ungodly peoples, that the Lord would honor His covenant and welcome them back.

And then as Daniel is doing that, and has been praying in that mode for a couple of weeks, the angel Gabriel shows up in human form. Daniel calls him the man Gabriel. He showed up and said, "Your prayers have been answered from the moment you first started praying. I've been on my way to get to you as an angel engaging in spiritual battle."

And that's insight for us in prayer, is to recognize that we're not just praying about earthly things. There's spiritual reality that overarches all of what goes on on earth, and our prayers are accomplishing things on the spiritual level as well. And sometimes things take longer because of that.

Because the Lord is doing things other than what we're aware of. And that's helpful, too, even when we're praying for other people, is that we can't just pray and say, "Joe blow is a believer, therefore Joe blow wants to do God's will, and this is God's will, so Lord, make Joe blow do that." It's not quite that simple. Joe Blow has to become convinced of what's written on his heart, but he's got to be convinced in his mind. then we come, when we get to the New Testament, as Jesus is being introduced in chapter 1, verse 17: "The law was given through Moses. Grace and truth were realized," that is, made an actual reality and practice, "through Jesus Christ."

And then we get Jesus explaining to the disciples what it is they've been seeing in Him, and what He's doing, and what He's calling them to. John 5:30: **"I can do nothing on my own. As I hear, I judge. My judgment is just because I do not seek my own will, but the will of Him who sent me."**

And then the affirmation of John 7:17: **"If any man is willing to do His will, he will know the teaching, whether it is of God or whether I speak for myself."** This is as people are accusing Him of being a blasphemer. Why don't you recognize the reality that is there in Jesus? Because you don't think you want what God is wanting for you. So you imagine that it's not from God, but it actually is.

And in the temple, John 7:28, Jesus cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, **"You both know me, you know where I'm from, and I've not come of myself. He who sent me is true, whom you do not know."**

And this is the problem we have. And this is a problem on the campus. A lot of students want to study apologetics, how to explain the gospel. Apologetics is valid. It's definitely valid. But people do not come to faith in Jesus through mere logical argument and clear explanation. They have to be convinced to be receptive, and the Lord doesn't do it through beating on us. He does it through blessing, through wooing, and through showing us others' sacrificial love.

John 8:28 said, **"When you lift up the Son of Man,"** that is, when He's crucified, **"then you will know that I am."** The translations say, "I am he." No, just "I am," covenant name, God's covenant name. I am whatever you need. I am wherever you need me. I am, etc. **"And I do nothing on my own initiative."** Literally, it's just, "I do nothing from myself." It doesn't originate with me. **"But I speak these things as the Father taught me. He who sent me is with me. He's not left me alone. I always do the things that are pleasing to Him."**

That's John 8:28, Jesus explaining it. And we get to Romans 8, and we get to the motivation of a mature son of God, is that motivation is to please the Father. I do, with what the Father has given me, the inheritance, the resources, the responsibilities entrusted to me, I do what pleases Him. If I'm doing that, I don't need to be following a set of rules. That transcends the rules. Now, the rules help me to understand what is pleasing to Him, but I don't do it because the rule says you have to do it. I do it because the rule helps me to understand what will accomplish what I will to do, which is to be pleasing to my heavenly Father.

And then again in John 8, he's getting the challenge from the religious leaders who were claiming to represent the true God but were fighting Him. **"If God were your Father, you would love me, for I proceeded forth and have come from God. I've not come from myself, but He sent me."** And then verse 54: **"If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. My Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, 'He is our God.'"**

And then we come in John 10:17: **"For this reason, the Father loves me, because I lay down my life that I may take it again."** This is when the Son of Man is lifted up. **"When you crucify me, then you will know."** Why? Because then you will see God's love for you demonstrated to the ultimate.

**"And the Father loves Me because I lay down My life that I may take it again. No one takes it from Me. I lay it down on My own initiative. I have authority to lay it down,"** meaning I have the prerogative, but I'm not forced to. And there again, the obedience of faith. Yes, what pleases the Father is that He does offer Himself sacrificially in order to save others, but He's not compelled to do it. So is when He says, **"I have the authority to lay it down."** It's a free will choice on My part. "And I have authority to take it up again." If I lay it down, then I have the prerogative of taking it up. "And this commandment I received from My Father" is very interesting.

Commandment, authority. I have the authority to do what God commands Me. I also have the authority to say no. And the commandment isn't, "You have to or else." It's in terms of accomplishing things. What the commandment is talking about, that's the way to do it, and it's the only way to do it. But it's not forced. This is the beauty of this whole thing, the obedience of faith.

Jesus does what He does. Yes, the Father calls Him to lay down His life, and He's welcomed that calling. He says, "I'm eager here to accomplish this." At the Last Supper He says, "I have eagerly desired," one of the good translations, "to eat this Passover with you." Literally He says, "I have lusted to eat this Passover with you." Well, the reason we don't translate it using the word lust, because the word lust has come in our usage to kind of almost exclusively sexual lust. And we can't translate it that way, but it meant very strong and even compelling desire. And in fact, it is the term with the step one. What is it that the step one, the not My will but Yours be done, is what cuts that compulsive drive? Literally, in the Romans text, what Paul says is it cuts the lust, the strivingness.

Then, the verse John 14:15, **if you love Me, you will keep My commandments**. And it's easy to read that as though, if you claim to love Me, prove it. I don't think that's what He means. He's saying, you don't have to worry about the rules and am I keeping all the rules? If you love Me, you'll know what pleases Me, and you won't have to do it in terms of going through the rule book. It's because of the relationship. It's the highest level of leadership and response. It turns the rules into this is the way of life so that I can join with the Lord in His life-giving work, receive it, and give it.

And I remember years ago, Steve was being interviewed by a Jewish news commentator. And this man was Jewish, and I think he had the faith of Abraham. We both are convinced of that. And he said, I don't keep the law to try to be acceptable to God. I keep the law out of thanksgiving to God. My favorite day of the year is the Day of Atonement. Have His complete forgiveness. And then, I'm not trying to gain His acceptance. He has accepted me. He's forgiven. He accepts. And I align myself with Him out of thanksgiving. And that, yes, you've got it. And that's what we get to do.

With truly believing Jews, and we've known various of them, they love the law. We think of law, we think of rules. But the law, actually, Torah is... It can be translated law. It also means instruction. And in fact, it comes from a root verb, to instruct, which is basically the idea of aiming an arrow. And you say, I love the law. Why? Because I love the fact that God loves us enough to tell us, to teach us how to succeed in life. What was promised in the garden from the fruit, do it yourself and you'll be wise.

So he's saying, "If you love me, you'll keep my commandments". Why does Jesus live? He loves the Father. So, hey, Father says, "This is the way to do it. Heck, that's the way I'm going to do it. And of course, although He is God, He's incarnate as a human being, and He's having to do what a human being does, and in learning what pleases the Heavenly Father and doing it.

And then John 14:21, **"He who has my commandments and keeps them**, not in one ear and out the other, but I have them and I hold on to what I've given, I treasure it, **he it is who loves me. And he who loves me shall be loved by my Father. I will love him and disclose myself to him**. There's eternal life, getting to know one another intimately.

And then John 14:23, **"If anyone loves me, he will keep my word. My Father will love him. We will come to him and make our abode in him or with him"**. And that's now the indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit. We will come in the person of the Holy Spirit such that you can live the same life.

And as in John 17:3, the high priestly prayer, **"This is eternal life, that they may know You**, He's speaking to the Father, **the only true God and Jesus Christ whom You sent**. And that's intimate knowledge. The man knew his wife and she conceived. It's the intimate love relationship, intimate knowing each other of intimate love relationship, and if you keep my commandments, you will abide in my love, just as I've kept my Father's commandments and abide in His love, recognizing that the commandments, the instructions for life, are an expression of God's love.

And then John 15:13, **"Greater love has no one than this, that will lay down his life for his friends. You are my friends if you do what I command you. No longer do I call you slaves** or servants. It translates either way. We rankle at the notion of slaves because we think of kidnap, slavery, and force, and abuse, and so forth. But I don't think Jesus ever thought of the disciples as His slaves. Servants, yes, that you're serving Me by furthering what I came for, welcoming it, and wanting to contribute to its success. **The slave does not know what his master is doing, but I've called you friends, for all things that I've heard from My Father, I've made known to you.**

And this is the thing also, that's the Lord's regard for us as friends. And as we welcome His life and we receive the Holy Spirit, then children of God by receiving His life such that God is literally our Father spiritually, not physically, and then growing to maturity and becoming faithful sons of God, son of God not being a male offspring, but One who has attained to responsible management of Father's affairs.

And then we get the affirmations for John: **"Whoever keeps his word, in him the love has truly been perfected. By this we know we are in him."**

But the friends too, the allies, God wants us to relate to Him the way the members of the Godhead relate to each other. And I think that's what this obedience of faith is all about. They cooperate because they're all convinced of the same thing. They have one program. They each contribute, and they greatly appreciate each other's contributions, and they love each other. And that's what the Lord wants with us. And so Romans is to help us to enter into that.

And trusting because we're convinced, and friends, children of God, by having entered into saving faith, welcoming God into my life, maturing into sons of God, relating to, getting to know Father and Son intimately, in part because of having Their life living in me. As I live out God's life, I really get to know God. And I delight, I recognize more and more how loved I am. And that leads me to love God more and more, and to delight in loving others. And it's all because of becoming convinced.

And I think this is why we have the question that have been books: how can a good God allow evil? I look at it, and I have to believe that all evil in this world is worth what is accomplished through allowing it, or God wouldn't allow it. And that I just find staggering. But I believe what it is, is that that is the necessary price of having us become, by free will choice, His allies, where we choose to be one with Him in purpose, in practice, in relationship, in love, because we have become convinced.

And then it's speculation on my part, but I could imagine, as Father, Son, and Spirit are planning this out, Father and Son are planning it out. And the Creator is Jesus. The New Testament makes that very clear, John 1. Colossians 1 and other places specify that the member of the Godhead who is the creator of the physical world is Jesus. And the Son, I can envision, again, this is speculation. Nothing in Scripture says this. I want to make that clear because my ministry is teaching the word and teaching it accurately. But I can see them, okay, I will make this world and set this thing up and give the prerogative of free will, which means the prerogative of rebelling and forth. And then the question: will you take responsibility for the consequences? Yes. I will create it. I will take full responsibility for what that means, for where that leads, and cleaning up the mess that is necessary in order to achieve the grand, sublime purpose of doing this: free will allies, to enable us to be free will allies, joining our will with His.

And so, Romans, the three steps of development leading to the ongoing lifestyle, that's what it takes to enter into that, and that's how to do so. That's how to succeed in doing so next week, in triumphing over the tragedy, the evil of the flesh, the sin that indwells us from birth and will always indwell this body. The only way that it will die is when this body dies. But we get to triumph over it, learn how to recognize it, subdue it, and rule over it, and take charge of our body and use our body to serve God instead of to fight Him, etc.

Next week, that's what we get to head into: the power of step two, where I've committed myself to the Lord's way in whatever area, but then I'm finding that I still revert to the old. And what can I do about that? And that's what we're getting into next week. How do I actually make it happen? Once I've committed my will, I have joined my will with Him. Then how do I get this from will into lifestyle practice? And that's what we're getting into next week, with lots of examples.

Let's pray.

> Lord, thank you that you demonstrated the obedience of faith, that you trusted the Father to enter into this fallen world to show the Father to us, and then to pay the greatest price, your own life, through rejection, through suffering, unbelievably, through bearing all of our iniquity, transgression, and sin in order that we would be forgiven, and filling us with your life so that we can be free will allies with you.

> Lord, show us, each of us, particular areas in our lives where you are inviting us, urging us to trust you, to move forward into your way instead of what we habitually do, ways we handle places where we're afraid or we're worried or we're angry, and to welcome instead your strong, powerful, beautiful life to bring redemption, bring life out of death.

> Thank You that there's much that we can do with You in this lifetime, starting with our own lives as we learn to do this. Lord, please encourage each of our brothers and sisters. May we embrace and love You and Your ways, and join with You so that we bring You to the people of our lives and give You joy as we head into Good Friday and Easter and beyond.

> May we celebrate You by giving You joy in the effect in our lives.

> Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.