> Lord Jesus, we are thankful to be Yours. Thank You that You are God with us always and that You will never fail or forsake us. Thank You that even though we are mortal and we lose parents and people that we know and love and have poured into, thank You that we will never lose You.

> Lord, we ask that You will strengthen each of us, that we will keep our gaze on You and grow from glory to glory in Your image, more and more of You to bring to those that You put us with. Give us joy in Your presence, Lord, no matter what's coming through others.

> Lord, thank You for the power and life of Your Spirit that dwells within us, that You change us and others get to see You over our shoulders, whether they recognize what they're seeing or not. Lord, use our lives to make others hungry for You. May our lives be infectious to cause many to want to know where that life comes from.

> Thank You for the opportunities that come. Lord, we know that family is a long-term ministry and often a messy business. We ask to keep our eyes glued on You, to show You to the people of our families, both those who know You and those who are turning away from You or have so far. But thank You that there's still a long time to come. May we stay steady in radiating Your life.

> Lord, thank You for tonight. Thank You that we start to get into the answer now to the rebel flesh within each of us, that we get to learn to recognize and reign over. Lord, we ask You to open each of our ears to hear You, and that we would grow through being in Your word tonight, not just fill our heads with more theology, but be listening to grow and to give joy to You. Thank You that You've come to give joy to us. Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.

As you know, last week we were in Romans 7, verse 7 through the end of the chapter, and we got to see, through Paul, the brilliant isolation of what this factor is, a strong factor in every one of us called sin. But not just individual instances, a strong force within each one of us as long as we're here on this earth that can sabotage efforts where we have recognized a pattern in our lives is not from the Lord. We've gone in sincere repentance to Him and given ourselves instead to live out what He calls us to in that area, and then proceed to make progress and then fall flat on our faces. And we've all experienced that.

We've all ended up at times where Paul ends that chapter: "Wretched man that I am, who will set me free from the body of this death?" And he's recognized that even when it's not just that he didn't really try, but his will was to approach things the Lord's way, and he still blew it. He couldn't do it consistently, at least. And we've all experienced that. It's easy to feel defeated, confused. Where's God? And why on earth does He leave the flesh in us anyway? Why doesn't He just move it when He fills us with the Holy Spirit?

And He will when we're home with the Lord. But He gives us... we're in this body. This body is indwelt by sin, and that's the result of the fall. It's passed down to everybody. There are no exceptions. And first man triggered it, so there were no exceptions at the beginning of human history, and there have been no exceptions since, except for Jesus.

It's passed down through the male line. The man bears the primary responsibility. The woman, the wife and mother, has just as much individual responsibility, but the responsibility to lead them is entrusted to the man. And so the fallenness is passed by the male line, and we know that first of all because that's the way Scripture describes it. But the birth of Jesus as a sinless human being, the only one who's ever lived after the first man gave in to the temptation to disobey, break his trust in the Lord, that Jesus was able to be born of a woman and be sinless because God was His Father, not a human father.

So it is passed on down. And what is it? What is this sin thing? We're used to, we think of sin, we think of a general condition, being sinful. We think of specific practice, to commit sin, to sin in some instance, to sin in some way, naming something that is ungodly and unrighteous, not in God's character or plan. But we tend not to recognize what especially Romans 7, latter part of Romans 7, brings out in Paul's very systematic interpretation, investigation, and analysis. And that is an active dynamic, an agent that works to trip us up.

How does it do it? Because the basic attitude of the fall is no one tells me what to do or not to. I decide for myself. And that's exactly what trips us up. We decide, as we looked in Romans 7, Paul saying, "My will is to obey," and yet, "I find myself doing the very thing that is contrary to my will, the very thing that I hate. I'm doing it, and I can't help it. I can do the right thing, but I can't do it consistently." Sooner or later, this sin, which is an unseen dynamic, but its effects are very visible, will trip me up.

And what is it? Why does law not work? Because law, God's gracious gift of instructions on how to succeed in life and what we do and how we relate to others, it's wonderful. But the only way it can be transmitted to us, taught to us, is to tell us what to do and also warn us about what not to do.

And so the law cannot fulfill righteousness because, not because it's a defect in the law, as Paul analyzed at the beginning of his analysis, Romans 7:7-11. But as soon as I am determined to do what I've been told to do, then this force, unseen force, rises up within me and blocks me from doing it.

And the effort to obey, having become obedient from the heart in committing myself to what God calls me to in principle, and then obeying with my mind. This second step is obeying with the mind. And it's what I do in individual instances where I have the opportunity to do what God commands and instructs and commands in His Word. I can't. This opposition comes up to being told what to do.

And even though I have, with my will and in my mind, Paul at the end of Romans seven says, "Wretched man that I am, who will set me free from this body of death?" The problem is Paul is able, and we all are able, to obey from the heart, obey with the mind by choosing at an individual instance to do what we know is what God calls us to. We can't make our bodies make it happen in practice outwardly, consistently.

We have, and the law by its nature says, "Do this and live." You will enjoy life, and people around you will have the benefit of it. But don't do this, or do that instead, and you will die. It will cut you off from closeness with the Lord at that moment. It will cut you off from fellowship with others who are close with the Lord. And you'll find that you can't carry it out. Not every time. Sometimes with some areas, it's every time. Other things, it's occasionally. And even when you're doing really well, all of a sudden, whoa, I did it again. How did that happen? And it's this.

Now we come to that point. But Paul says at the end, **"Wretched man that I am, who will set me free from this body of death? Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord."** I am obeying with my mind. I'm making a conscious decision at this opportunity to employ the teaching that I'm committed to in principle from the heart. I do make the decision in my mind to obey, and I don't do it.

And Paul's conclusion at the end of Romans 7:25, is to say, "oh, I'm now obeying with my mind when I do this, when I choose to obey." And from the heart, with my mind, but not yet with my body. That's progress. But the fact that I can't live it out in outward practice, I can't make my body implement my will, God's will, which is my will. My body refuses. Something in my body refuses. This dynamic in my body refuses. So there has to be more, and that's what we're getting into now in Romans 8. What is this something more? The Lord has provided this something more, but we need to learn how to rely on it in order to succeed in doing what pleases God and pleases me.

And I think you've heard me say before, if I could only have one, or now two, chapters of the Bible, Romans 8 would be one of them. Colossians 3 would be another. But there is so much here that, as we really understand it, we can walk in victory by the Spirit over the flesh.

And he starts tonight. We'll be focusing on how, by the Spirit, do I take charge of my mind? Because everything else comes from that. My attitudes, my words, my actions come from what I coddle in my mind. He will start with that. And again, we encourage each one of us not to just say, "Yep, great theology," but instead ask the Lord to show me how to walk this out where I'm living, with the people I'm with.

Paul starts out, **"So then now there is no condemnation for those in Christ Jesus. For the law of the Spirit of life,"** and that goes back, we started Romans 5, **"having been justified by faith,"** being rightly aligned with God in terms of, judicially, in terms of the law. But now we're talking about carrying it out in practice. **There's no condemnation for those in Christ Jesus, for the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets you free from the law of sin and of death.**

First, a note on when is He talking about. Almost all English translations at this point will say something to the effect of, "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and of death." That is true, but that's not the point. And it's tragic that it gets translated that way because it makes it sound like a point of doctrine rather than a statement of hope. It's not what happened in the past. The verb tense here is an aorist. I like to call it the tenseless tense because tense means time. And tense is the element of a verb form that expresses time, says when whatever this is that the verb is talking about takes place.

The aorist, you may be familiar. I've been around this for a while. It's the Greek grammatical term. It means without horizon. You can catch the aorist horizon. It is a totally unique verb form. I'm not aware of any other language that has this, but I don't know that many languages. But English definitely does not.

In English, as with far and away most languages, it is necessary in stating the verb that describes a state of being or a course of action, or an action itself, it's necessary to use the form of the verb that communicates when this is. I come. I came. I will come. I came is past. I had come is before sometime in the past. I am coming. I'm in the process of doing it now. I will come. Futures.

The beauty of the aorist, and I think this is one of these things, the various indicators of the Lord's preparation in history, in languages, and in numerous ways to prepare for the incarnation and resurrection and revelation through Jesus' life on earth and His death and being raised from the dead. But the beauty of the aorist is that it doesn't say when. And that makes it ideal for expressing that which is eternal, that which always is.

Was it? Yes. Is it? Yes. Will it be? Yes. All of the above. We have verb tenses that will combine two of those and show a relation between past and present or between present and future, but we don't have a form that covers all of them. And the infinitive just describes the meaning of the word, and the gerund expresses the idea of the verb in a noun form, but they're not really functioning as verbs.

And the point is that when God wants to speak in His word about something that always is, the aorist is ideal for it. And we translate, for the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets you free from the law of sin and death. When? Whenever. And when is not the important thing. The fact is that it does, and it can be translated. The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets you free whenever you're thinking about or contemplating the law of sin and death. Whenever you rely on the law of the Spirit of life, you will be set free from the law of sin and death. It doesn't matter when. And that's the key.

Why is there no condemnation? Because God has provided for us to get free from the law of sin and death. God needed to explain to us how to live life successfully. That's a great gift. And we've known devout Jews who are thankful for the law, and they surprise Christians by saying that. You're thankful for the law? Because Christians think of the law as constraints. But we've been told on occasions, oh, I am thankful for the law. We are privileged that our God loves us enough to tell us how to succeed in life. And that's true. It really is a blessing. It's wise living.

As Paul said in Chapter 7, the **law is holy and righteous and good**. And when God says good, it's good. The problem is just how to leap over the stumbling block of the flesh's refusal to obey.

And I think before we go on, it is important with the no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. Why is that important? And it's because it sets me free from focus on where? On myself and the past, even if it was two seconds ago. It's a place that the adversary can really grip us of, oh my gosh, how could I have done it again? And people start hiding out from God, from each other, pretending to be perfect when they know they're not, and putting up barriers between themselves and the Lord, between them and other people.

And instead, the Lord says, I've paid for that with the life of My Son. Jesus has willingly taken that. **There is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus**, even if it's the 70th time or 70 times seven. And it's important. That's bedrock to grow from. As long as I think I'm under condemnation, my whole focus will be performance and shame and guilt and despair instead of, thank you, Lord. I'm completely forgiven. Thank you that it does matter what I do, what I think, what I say. It has real impact. But I'm not under condemnation from the One, the judge who counts, no matter what other people are saying. And as I'm free, then I can move forward to grow because my focus is, thank you, Lord, for Your grace, Your favor, and I can keep growing forward. Yes, I just blew it, but thank you that I can grow, that doesn't define who I am before You.

And it's important, too, as we look at one another, that we don't say grace for me, but condemnation for you, because what you do affects me and I don't like it. And so I'll try to use some condemnation to try to stop you. And we've all done that. And the Lord doesn't do that.

Now, in Romans 5, the beginning, the Lord justified by faith means that we are not condemned under the law. But now we're going beyond that. This is not a matter of grace. Grace is God's favor, even in the face of guilt.

This is no condemnation because God has provided and has given every believer, already residing within every genuine believer, every new creature in Christ, the means of succeeding in obeying God's Word.

And so it's not just that God is the nice big teddy bear grandpa type up there who says, "I've lived long enough to know. This is normal." It's not that.

At the end of Romans 7, Paul is in despair. But the news is, God is at work fixing what is causing Paul's despair. And so **the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets you free from the law of sin and of death.**

First of all, we've got the issue of what's the law. And it doesn't matter whether you're talking a law of science, the laws of physics, any law, God's law. A law is something that is the way it is, and it will not change. And there's no point in trying to change the law.

Now, I'm not talking about government law. There are provisions to change the law, but you can't change the law to suit yourself, even in that context. But the laws of God's creation, the laws of physics, the law of gravity, they will never change because those are built into the created order. And God's law of righteousness will never change.

And so a law is something that is a law because it's the way something always is, no exceptions. If somebody were to come up with an experiment that proved an exception to the law of gravity, it would no longer be the law of gravity. It would be demoted to a theory, theorem.

And what do we have? We have the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. That is the way it is. And we have the law of sin and death, which is the way it is. Well, if neither one of those is mutable, can be changed, then what do we do with this contradiction, this conflict?

The way to break out of the constraints imposed by a law is to apply the power of a higher law, which does not break the lower law. It just exerts a stronger force.

Example of this: heavier-than-air flight. The law of gravity is what it is. Flight, we can look up practically any time and see commercial airliners going along. They are not disproving the law of gravity. They are demonstrating the laws of aerodynamics and their ability to exert a stronger force than the force of gravity on the particular body of consideration, the aircraft. And as long as there is an adequate airfoil and adequate airspeed, the laws of lift will exert a greater force on the airplane than the law of gravity. And the result is that the plane will ascend into the air and will continue to stay up there or go up higher or down lower, depending on how much of the force of lift is applied.

But that will keep going only as long as the laws of aerodynamics are utilized to overcome the effect. It's the effects of the laws of aerodynamics being greater than the effect of gravity on this thing, neither law being altered at all.

This is what the Lord does. What is this? The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus overcomes the law of sin and of death!

At the beginning in Romans 5, we were described, our natural state, as being weak or helpless, rebellious, disobedient, and sinners in practice, in enmity with God.

The three steps of change address those in reverse order. Step one deals with the enmity or fighting against God, trying to keep Him out and do our thing in spite of Him. Step two deals with being sinners, with failing to hit the target of what human life is supposed to be and helpless to do anything about it.

Now we come to the helpless, to the weak. It's the power for life. And the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets you free from the law of sin and death. For what the law is not capable of, in respect to which is weak through the flesh, that's what we were looking at last week, God does, sending His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and with respect to sin, condemns forever sin in the flesh, in order that the law's requirement that we live righteously in practice might be fulfilled in us who are walking, not walking according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.

As we're going through life, relying on the Spirit to overcome the effect of the law of sin, then we are able to fulfill the law's requirement, the law's good requirement, and do that which is pleasing to God because it really is life for us. It's to our benefit.

A little later on, Paul is going to say, **although the body is dead because of sin**, it does not have the life of God in it because of sin's determination to keep influences out. **The Spirit is life**. The body is dead because it lacks true life. But when God placed the Holy Spirit in us, the Spirit is the life that the body needs. The body lacks life. The Spirit is life. When we get there, we'll point out again, almost all translations say the body is dead because the Spirit is alive because of righteousness. That's true, but that's not what Paul said. He doesn't say it's alive. He says it's life.

And translators have a dangerous habit of trying to correct grammar. And a basic principle of setting Scripture is, when you find what you think is an error in Scripture, especially in Paul, when Paul is presenting an argument, reconsider it on the basis that Paul is probably not making an error in grammar. His mastery of the Greek language was extreme. And so Paul isn't making an error. He's making a point.

The body is dead. That's the state it's in, a mortal body. A mortal body, there are three states that a body can be in. It can be alive, a living body, a dead body, or a mortal body A mortal body implies that it is alive, but it's capable of dying. And we'll get there, but the law of the Spirit of life.

The Holy Spirit is the life of God and has the power to impart the life of God, to give that life to our bodies that lack life otherwise as a result of the fall. We are born in physical bodies with conscious personal life, the soul, but we don't have the Spirit of God that we need in order to be the whole human beings that we are. We do have a spirit, but it's the spirit of sin. It's the spirit of rebellion, and it's the spirit of resistance to God, enemies with God, helpless, failures, and hostile to God.

But we have the Holy Spirit within, who is definitely not hostile to God, being actually one of the members of the Godhead, and is able to bring us into eternal life, which, as Jesus defined it, quoted for us in John 17:3, **"This is eternal life, that they may know You,"** He's praying to the Father, **"the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You sent."** He doesn't mention the Spirit. Why? Because it's getting to know God the Father and God the Son by means of God the Spirit in me as an individual believer.

And **"the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets me free from the law of sin and of death"**, which says I have a choice as a believer. And that's our understanding of why the Lord leaves the flesh there as long as we're here, is we're called to exercise our free will to learn to walk and think and speak filled with the Spirit and recognize and subdue and reign over the flesh within.

And there's the key right there. The commission before the fall was to subdue and rule. Subdue is to overcome the opposition. And we know plenty of that. It's in the news now with all the various wars and stuff. Fallen man subdues by cracking skulls. God subdues by winning hearts.

But now here, subduing that which is and always will be ungodly, the flesh, to overcome the flesh and its opposition to righteous living, we need to rely on the higher power of the Holy Spirit within us. Paul is proceeding to explain how to do that.

The key here now is to walk, to proceed through life according to the Spirit rather than according to the flesh. We all have a lifetime, our lifetime so far, of experience walking according to the flesh, just going through life the way it happens naturally in a fallen world. That shift, what am I relying on to accomplish what God calls me to do?

Picking up again in verse 4, **in order that the law's requirement, which is that we live righteously in practice, might be fulfilled in us who are**, or whenever we are, **those walking not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit. For those being according to the flesh**, that is, what are you by nature? If you are of the flesh, then you have a physical body, you have a soul, a conscious personal life, and you have a defective spirit, a spirit of independence, rebellion, reaction against being told what to do, which means you can't cooperate with God.

**Those being according to the flesh focus their minds on the things of the flesh**. Now the issue is, how do I switch from one to the other? How do I learn to walk by the Spirit instead of by the flesh? Where am I putting my attention? Where do I focus my mind? On all the things that are natural in this world, other than God, to the flesh is an interference, an enemy. Point blank, Romans 5, we're told that we're enemies of God.

Those who are in the flesh by nature, meaning they don't have the Spirit of God, but they're capable of receiving the Spirit of God, if they come to realize that it's available and that they want it, that's all it takes. The prayer of inviting the Lord to come into your life.

But those who are according to the Spirit, also in the Spirit, he uses the terms in the flesh, in the Spirit, to describe your state, your condition, which is simply either you do or don't have the Spirit of God. You don't have the Spirit, at least not yet, or you do have the Spirit. And if you have the Spirit, you will always have the Spirit. But you will benefit from the Spirit in overcoming the flesh and triumphing over sin and using your body to live righteously if you focus on relying on the Spirit and don't just cruise along passively and let the world squeeze you into its mold.

**For those according to the flesh focus their minds on the flesh, but those according to the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. For the mind focused on the flesh is death.**

The flesh is the natural constitution, including then being indwelt by sin, the determination to be independent, do my own thing, shut everybody out, most especially God.

And 2 Corinthians 10:4-6 is very helpful with this. Paul says to the Corinthians, **though we walk in the flesh, we don't war according to the flesh. But the weapons of our warfare are divine for the destruction of fortresses, tearing down speculations and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.**

What kind of fortress are you talking about? A fortress is a defensive structure. It's to keep an enemy out. So, tearing down the fortresses, what we have built up to keep God out of our lives, and tearing down speculations. And that's what we do. We imagine finding life in things where life is not to be found, and we have all sorts of fantasies. Probably the most graphic example is sexual fantasies, where we are imagining absolute wonderfulness in doing what God says not to do, or what God does intend us to do, but not with anyone other than our spouse. And those speculations are walling God out, because I'm imagining, I'm at least thinking, I'm experiencing life vicariously by imagining myself doing what God says will not lead to life. Only I'm doing it because it seems like life to me. It feels like it, and I don't want anybody, especially God, to tell me otherwise.

2 Corinthians goes on: **tearing down fortresses and speculations and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and taking every thought captive to the obedience of Christ.**

This is the thing: where is my mind focused? And we're very familiar with this. When you're driving a car, it's very important that your mind be adequately focused on the road, traffic around you, etc., or you're going to get hurt and/or somebody else is going to get hurt. And we understand focus of mind. If you want to pass whatever exam to fulfill prerequisites or whatever graduate school you want to go to, as a student, you better focus your mind on the material that's going to be examined. And if you're past school and you're exercising a profession, medicine is a very strong example of this. When you're seeing patients, you need to keep your mind focused on the practice of medicine, focused on examining, discerning, diagnosing the patient's needs, and proceeding with the appropriate known remedies or treatments. And if you don't, people are going to get hurt or people will not be helped.

This idea of the mind focus is nothing strange and new to us. But what is new, always, there are new areas where I have not learned to focus my mind on the Spirit. The mind focused on the flesh is death there in some sort. And definitely when the Bible talks about life and death, primary focus is in relation to God. Am I in living relationship with God? I mean, in active, dynamic relationship, learning from God, taking my concerns to God and trusting Him, counting on Him to guide me from His written Word, and then within that context of the fixed things that are stated in Scripture by His Spirit in terms of the specific element I'm in? And if I do that, then I will be receiving and experiencing and enjoying life in relation to God. And if I'm not doing that, it's back to the same old death.

But in everyday terms, when we talk about life and death, we're talking about physical life and physical death. And we often read Scripture that way, with the presumption that the term is being used primarily to talk about the physical. No. And we know this, among other ways, from Genesis 2 and 3, where the Lord tells the first man, "The day you eat from the fruit of this one tree, out of all the others, eat freely from all the trees except this one, the day you do that, you will die, you will certainly die. And the first couple eat of the fruit. They do not die physically, not for decades, but we see other forms of death all over the place: guilt, fear, hiding, blaming, and so forth.

The mindset of the flesh is death. It produces all those same kinds of things that show up for the first time in Genesis 3 and just keep showing up, and new aspects and nuances and expressions coming up throughout the history of Scripture and God's dealings with His people.

But the mind focused on the Spirit is life, is active, dynamic relationship with God, intimacy with God, which is what eternal life is. And eternal life is not when. Eternal life is what? With whom? We get confused by eternal because we think of it as everlasting. And everlasting life is part of eternal life, but it's only a small aspect of it.

The issue is we are designed to live in active partnership and close communion and deep personal relationship, intimate relationship, with God. The fall broke that up, and we are learning to enter into that. So the key here is, where am I focusing when we first, by welcoming the wisdom God gives us and committing to follow His instruction, His commandments, His wisdom for life? And in a specific issue, that's what step one is, making that commitment.

Step two, then, and as soon as you've taken step one, then how do you act on that? You keep looking for opportunities to make it happen in practice, not just sitting around waiting to get clobbered or tripped up or deceived by temptation, but you're looking for opportunities to succeed in doing the new.

The key is putting our attention, our focus, and where we're looking on the Spirit, on the fact that I now have the light of God Himself within me, at the core of my being, the heart, the seat of motivation, the seat of purpose, the seat of intent, the seat of self-understanding.

Continuing, **the mind focused on the flesh is death; the mind focused on the Spirit is life and peace. Because the mind focused on the flesh is hostility toward God**. It's an exclusive binary condition. There's no middle ground. It's not a gradual blend from one to the other. Yes, there is always a mixture in our life of the activity of depending on the flesh and activity depending on the Spirit, but every individual element at any given point in time is one or the other, period.

**The mindset on the flesh is hostility toward God because it does not subject itself to the law of God**. That's the "nobody tells me what to do." And then you make New Year's resolutions, or you set up a schedule for preparing for the quals, the comprehensive examinations that you have to pass sometime about in the first year or year and a half of your PhD program, having to be able to answer questions about absolutely anything in your field. Fine. You work out a study program, and two months into it, you haven't started. Why not? Because nobody tells me what to do. Even I cannot tell me what to do. As soon as I fix, I am committed to doing this, the flesh says, "Uh-uh. No entangling alliances. I'm not a slave anyway."

**It does not subject itself to the law of God. It is not even capable.** That's what we looked at in detail last week. **And those being in the flesh**, that is, that's all it is. They don't have the Spirit. They **are not able to please God**. That's verse eight.

This gets very practical because this can stay on the theological level, or you can learn how to work it out in practice. And the more you do, the more victory you and the Lord will have. And it's very easy to think, and again, it's thinking of the flesh, I can think about anything, and it's not going to affect what I do or what I say. And that is absolute kidding ourselves when we think that.

Here he is saying that the first place that the battle line happens in our conscious mind is the mind. Of course, it's this whether the Spirit's there or not. Have we submitted our lives to Jesus? That's the first battle line. But the next one, once we have, is the Spirit is there, but the flesh is still there with all of its habits of thinking and reactions, and all of us have a bad case of the flesh, some more pronounced than others or more out in the open than others.

What is the key? A lot of times people will talk about, "And I want to live by the Spirit, worship by the Spirit," and these are all very valid aspects of being filled with the Spirit for worship, for prayer, for service. Probably all of us have given ourselves to the Lord and experienced the Lord taking over by the Spirit, enabling strength to serve where we were weak going in.

But what about the thinking of the Spirit? What on earth is that? That can sound very spacey. He says that the effect is very tangible. Just Jesus said, "You know, the wind is there. You can't see it, but you see the effect". And it's true with our focus and our mind. If our mind is cruising and just going, reacting in the old ways, what we will see is forms of death. We'll see depression, we'll see anger, we'll see alienation from other people, from the Lord, lots of forms of death.

Paul is very good about giving us lists that help us to identify the flesh. Because how would you know what's the flesh and what's the Spirit? It's all coming from inside. In modern life, we want to say, "I need to be authentic to myself." So whatever urge is coming from within, I need to follow it because that is an expression of me. And for believers who do that, it can get very ugly because it's the old spirit that is all of our minds. We have habits of thinking and old approaches. And remember, the flesh, the natural person, is thoroughly self-focused. It's all about me.

Paul, in Galatians 5, in one of his wonderful lists, talks about what are identifiers, what shows up in my life if my mind is focused on the flesh versus my mind filled with the Spirit. And what shows up, he starts with Galatians 5:13: **"You were called to freedom, brethren, only don't turn your freedom into an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another."** And he says what shows up that is an expression of the flesh, and he's got his whole list in 19 through 21, but it includes enmities, strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, disputes, dissensions, factions, among other things. Keep reading the whole thing because this is really helpful.

Back up a little bit: **"Walk by the Spirit, and you will not carry out the desires of the flesh."** We don't have to fight the flesh. The Spirit is more powerful than the flesh, so if we just concentrate on focusing on the Spirit and counting on the power of the Spirit in us to accomplish what God calls us to in His Word.

**The flesh sets its desire against the Spirit, the Spirit against the flesh. These are in opposition to one another. You cannot do the things you please**. There is no third alternative. At any given moment, anything we do, anything we think, is either from the flesh or from the Spirit. It's either godly or it's ungodly. It's either focused on things that are righteous or it's focused on self. And if you're led by the Spirit, you're not under the law.

**The deeds of the flesh are evident: immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, disputes, dissensions, factions, envying, drunkenness, carousing, and things like these.** Pick up any newspaper. What are the primary topics in most of the articles? Talking about the fact of these things, what people have done and what people are accusing people of doing.

**I have forewarned you that those who practice such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God**. We are the Lord's if you've given your life to the Lord, but we don't experience Him. When He's talking about inherited, He's not talking about they won't inherit the kingdom of God. He's not talking about whether or not you go to heaven after you die physically. He's talking about receiving the resources of the Spirit to manage them as God has designed us to do, to be His steward managers of His creation.

**But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control. Against such things there is no law. And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. If we live by the Spirit, let us walk by the Spirit.** That's what this is talking about, is walking by the Spirit.

If you are a believer, if you have asked Jesus into your heart and asked Him to save you from the natural ungodliness that is in you and replace it with what is pleasing to God and is truly life for yourself to enjoy and in relations with others, then you have the Spirit, but you have to learn how to benefit from the Spirit. Now, it's not that the Spirit is not doing anything, but the Spirit is available to a lot more. The Spirit, we're told, prays for us with groanings too deep for words. The Spirit groans because of being dragged along wherever we decide to go. We take the Spirit with us, whether we're depending on the Spirit, welcoming the Spirit, or ignoring the Spirit.

And we've had people say about various habits that we're trying to get free from and decided they wanted to change something and ask, what made you decide you want to change? I discovered the Holy Spirit doesn't like doing pot, or the Holy Spirit doesn't like pornography, or whatever. And the Spirit will be doing that. The Spirit will always be appealing to us from the core of our being where the Spirit resides.

But the Spirit is available to do so much more that the Spirit does when we welcome it. And that's what the mind focused on the Spirit is about. And I think a lot of times people want to depend on the Spirit for other things. But what it's been very helpful to us, what does the mindset on the Spirit, what is that? And if you look at, for instance, the Upper Room Discourse in John, Jesus tells us what the Spirit will do. And one of the primary things is that He will remind us of the truth, in John 16:13, remind us of what Jesus has taught us. "Remind us of what's in the Word. And lead us into the truth". And the truth in Scripture is always talking about the truth of God's revelation to us of what makes for real life. And one thing that I've done that's been very helpful in my life is to ask the Lord to show me where are some key areas where it's clear from the results that my mind has been focused on the flesh, and what does the Lord want to fill my mind with instead so that what I live and produce is life and peace and the fruit of the Spirit?

And I used to be walking depressed, and I learned that's a form of death, especially when I was a student at Stanford decades ago. And I'm not depressed anymore. And I am a student of the Lord.

Anyway, it was very helpful to me to say, Lord, I want an early radar system. I want to catch signs of my thinking in those old ways early. And what do I replace it with? Because I can focus my mind either place. He gives us free will, but it has real results for me and for those I impact. And so I want to fill my mind more and more with the Spirit. And that starts with, what does God say in His Word?

And an example with the depression, I began to realize, if you listen to your own thoughts, that when I got depressed, I was focused on my performance. I should have done that better. I could have studied more. Sifting through conversations, I should have handled that better. And it was all should have, lack. One hundred percent is the only acceptable thing, and anything less is no good. It's law. And I could get quite depressed looking at, and my focus was, guess where, on myself.

But as I learned to recognize early, oh, I'm reverting to that old thinking, instead, what does the Lord say? No condemnation, just opportunity to grow. How can I learn from this? How can I thank You, Lord, that You're here? Please teach me. And if I didn't handle a conversation well, may I express You better next time? So I can turn, I can recognize the old patterns, renounce that, and welcome instead, where does the Lord call me to focus to move forward with Him?

And it's very helpful.

Another example is anger. Anger is something that comes up in all of our lives at times. It can either be the mindset on the flesh, mine or anybody else's, leads to death. It's easy, as we said at the beginning, I want no condemnation for me, but you whose choices impact my life, there is plenty of condemnation. I may fool myself that I can think anything in my head, but I won't act on it. I won't express it. That is fooling myself. What we coddle on the inside will out. And who know us well can read it even if we don't say it.

It's very helpful to keep the focus: what is going on in my mind with regard to other people? How could they? They always, they never. I know them in the flesh and I can analyze it. The more I focus there, the more angry, the more condemning, and what will come out of my mouth, what I will do in action, can be horrifying. We're all capable of that. The more we focus on what's wrong with another person instead of forgiving, praying for those who hurt you, being part of the solution, being kind, expressing the fruit of the Spirit... It's the kindness of God that leads to repentance, not His thundering in anger at us and condemning us. I want to open ears and open hearts, not close ears and close hearts and cut off relationship. I want to express the Lord Himself, because then He has a lot to work with to help the other person change, as well as me.

The thinking according to the Spirit is, what do You say in Your Word, Lord? And Spirit is glad to bring Scripture to mind. What applies here? I know the thinking of the flesh, and it can get ugly. The more I coddle it, the more it will grow. I'm giving a place for the accuser to work. As long as I do that, it will come out of my mouth. I will express it in my attitudes and words and actions, and I'm kidding myself if I think otherwise.

Another is, what about circumstances? If circumstances aren't going the way I was counting on them going, maybe there's a big health issue, or the finances drop out, or there are any number of circumstantial things that all of us have no control over. The question is, how do I respond in the flesh? It's resentment. Where's God? I was counting on this. Fear. I've got to solve this. Worry, stress. I've got to solve it myself instead of... And the mindset on the Spirit is, I go to Him. Lord, thank You for this. Thanksgiving for all things. I wouldn't have signed up for this, but here it is. Thank You for it. Show me how to walk with You in it. Show me how to express You.

The various medical things that we've had in recent years, and in past years, we've had some big ones. We wouldn't have signed up for any of them. But as we've said, thank You, Lord. This wasn't on my plan, but here it is. Thank You for it. Show us how to express You to each other. Show us how to express You to the medical teams as they care for us and for others.

And we've had no end of opportunities before, and much life and peace in the midst of things not going the way that we wanted them to go. It's our choice, and it starts in the mind. And the results tell us, oh, where was my focus? If I'm experiencing depression, anger, causing dissension, all of that...

That's why Paul has his wonderful lists, because none of us would say, oh, my mind is focused on the flesh at the moment, or diagnosing. I think it's on the Spirit at the moment, but how do I know? It's because of what it produces, first in me and then in those around me. You'll know them by their fruit.

And this is what the references to fruit... Let's talk about the fruit of the Spirit. It's not talking, and definitely I don't want to disparage the fruit of evangelism, of people actually coming to the Lord. That's wonderful, but there's a tendency, and people get caught up in thinking that being a Christian is all about bringing others to Christ. That's wonderful and it's important, but the biggest thing that will bring people to the Lord is seeing the Lord's life in you, in me, not my just talking about what they don't understand, what they don't see.

So verses 10 and 11, which is where we finish tonight, and we've mentioned most of this. It's kind of review, but getting it from the Lord in His word, not just our words. **If Christ is in you, although on the one hand the body is dead on account of sin, yet on the other hand the Spirit is life on account of righteousness.** The body lacks life, but the Spirit gives the body the life that it lacked.

**And if the Spirit of the one raising Jesus from the dead dwells in you, the one raising Christ will also cause your mortal body to live through His Spirit dwelling in you.** Life out of death, not just life after physical death. We've already got the death that sin causes. We've got plenty of it, all of us. And all of that is just opportunity to be raised to new life, real life, the real life that either counterfeits or just plain contradicts.

And it's being raised from the dead here and now in what God does in my life while I'm still living here on earth. That's the point here. He will complete it, as we know, in the twinkling of an eye. Whatever hasn't gotten addressed, and don't worry, there'll be plenty at that point, will all be taken care of. We don't have to carry on this process forever until we're perfect.

But this period in time, between the time of discovering my need, recognizing my need for the Lord and His life and inviting Him in, and thereby being born again, born from above, both are true. The phrase means both. But birth is only the beginning of a life, of a lifespan, a life experience.

And God does not intend that we just be born again and then sit around waiting to die physically and enter into perfection. He intends it to be like what He has built into human life, a constant learning process of who I am, what I'm capable of doing, and learning to develop that potential in reality, in practice. And we do that with physical capabilities.

And the grandparent phase is a very good time to observe that and see how it works, because you're not so busy with all the responsibilities that the parents have. They're now learning how much you poured into them when they were at that stage. Our daughter, who's a mom, has thanked us many times for what she didn't even know we did.

And it's a lifelong learning process. And we have so much potential as new creatures in Christ from being born again, but it needs to be developed. We need to become aware of what is possible and the benefit to everybody involved, to us and to everybody affected by us living around us. Learn what is possible. Get excited about the new life.

It's not just about dealing with the problem of sins. It's laying hold of the privilege and the wonder and the vitality of new life. And that's what should drive our relationship with the Lord, is wanting to get to know Him better, getting to know Father better, getting to know the Son better, getting to know the Spirit better by seeing the Spirit work in us, which is a different perspective from getting to know the Father and the Son, and in others.

And seeing the Spirit in others, that's one of the ways we discover the potential that is in us as well. But this is not just about fixing the problem. This is about appropriating the treasure, the wonder, and sharing it with others, including explaining it, evangelism. But the biggest thing is showing people.

He talks about our being glorified with Him. What does that mean? To be glorified is to radiate the reality of true life. We're told in Colossians that Jesus is the exact radiance of God's nature. You want to know what God's like? That's what Jesus told the disciples. Show us the Father, Jesus said. What do you mean, show me the Father? Not exactly His words. But the sense of, what do you think I've been doing all this time? And he said he has seen the Father.

The opportunity here, and encouragement for each of us, we don't take on the whole field of our mind, but ask the Lord first for one or two salient areas where, if you ask the people you live with or impact, what can I learn now? Where would they love to see the Lord more in me? I can take that on as an opportunity to, oh, where's my thinking old? Where am I just reacting to what other people are doing or reacting to circumstances?

Instead, I have the opportunity: Lord, where do you say to have my focus? What can I do in these circumstances? How can I express You, give You joy on where my focus is according to Your word, and then express that? And as you do, you will be growing in a way that shows the Lord to those that you are with on a regular basis.

And you aren't taking on the whole ball of wax, that's our whole lives. But you can make major progress in one area, and then another, and another, and then come back to that first one and make even more, where you show forth the Lord more and more, starting with where is my focus and where is my confidence?

And a lot of people look to the Spirit to guide them where to live, what job to do, and the Spirit will guide in those things. That's okay, but that's not the main point. That isn't what Jesus mentioned at all when He told the disciples the night before He was crucified, when He told them that when He went, the Father would send the Spirit. And what He told them the Spirit would do would be to remind them of the things that Jesus had said, so to continue the teaching and to lead them into all the truth.

And truth of Scripture is that which produces life. It's not just factual stuff. And we do rely on the Spirit to guide us in mundane things here and there. Those are kind of extra perks. The main thing is to guide us into true life, the Lord's life, and expressing Him to others, and in relations with others.

So next week, same pattern as Paul uses with all the things. This first thing we looked at is what are the alternatives? What's the natural, the normal, and what is the supernatural that God is calling us into? Walking by the Spirit instead of according to the flesh through focusing our mind on the Spirit and the things of the Spirit rather than the things of the flesh. We'll get into more of the dynamics next week.

One last point is that the life from the Spirit through us, first in our minds and then what we express, is not dependent on circumstances. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness. None of it depends on the circumstances.

And we saw that when we were teaching in Romania, right as the Berlin Wall came down, which we have pieces of because we were going through at that point. And in trying to get back into one of our accounts for government reporting, where do you spend your 21st birthday or celebrate your 21st birthday? That's easy, because I spent my 21st birthday detained by the East German border police in Berlin. So I know where I was. Scared this young Westerner.

But the point was, we saw the fruit of the Spirit in believers who had had everything taken away. Yes. But our life and peace changed, and the fruit of the Spirit doesn't depend on the circumstances. No. And we would tell them, teach us how to walk with the Lord under persecution, because we know that's coming on the West. And they said, oh, that's nothing. We do that all the time. What we're afraid of is we don't know how to walk with prosperity and materialism.

Let's pray, and there will be much more, and we will keep making it very practical and very positive. Encourage you to ask the Lord to show you one place to be practicing this, and you'll understand it better and better. An opportunity to walk within one more vestige of a new life.

> Lord, thank you that we're now in a position of choice. Now that we've come to You, now that You have poured out Your Holy Spirit into us to the last drop, thank You that we're not under condemnation, no matter how many times we've blown it, but just the opportunity to grow, to learn, to turn our focus from the old tracks that result in lots of forms of death for us and those we impact, and turn our minds to what You say in Your Word and the filling of Your Spirit, to live it out, to show You forth to the people of our lives.

> Thank You that every day provides opportunities for this. May we all move forward and give You joy in filling more of the tracks of our mind with Your Spirit and Your Word. Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.