> Oh, Lord, thank you that You are here wherever each of us are.
> Thank You that You are our living Emmanuel, always with us, Lord, in all seasons.
> We are so thankful that we are in this world with You and, because of You, with hope, with strong hope.
> Thank You that we are never alone. And we always have You with us to turn to and to join with.
> We’re thankful to be filled with Your life, thankful to be called, to be partnering with You and what You’re doing in a broken world while You keep us growing at the same time.
> We thank You that You complete what You’ve begun in every one of Your saints, every one of Your holy ones, and that’s all of us because we’re filled with the Holy Spirit.
>
> Lord, use this evening for real encouragement or insight, for equipping to come alongside of others as well as to grow in You and to give You joy, Lord.
> Thank You, Lord, for each one here so loved by You and by us.
> In Your name, amen.

If you saw the announcement this quarter, we’re starting into the how to actually change.
We did this a number of years ago, but we’ve learned a lot since then, grown a lot since then, groaned a lot since then.
Hopefully, this quarter will be so good for each one of us for personal growth, for moving forward in areas where we’ve been already at work with the Lord or taking up some new ones, and also that it will be powerful for equipping to be able to come alongside of others with God’s word and wisdom for real change.

Many believers don’t actually believe real change is possible.
Many come to the Lord so thankful, and they really do, so thankful for the forgiveness, so thankful for the hope of heaven, though some are not sure.
Even some recognized solid pastors that publish in this time state they hope that heaven, their names will be written in the Lamb’s Book of Life.
But many really give up in the in-between part.
Either the in-between part is just trying to be good and keep adding to the list of what that means and having tried hard, often giving up or deciding that I just pray and wait for God to do it to me because I've tried and it doesn’t seem to work.I can make some progress in some areas but the deeper ones, I make some and then fall back in.

Some pastors question whether change is actually possible.
We’re thankful to say it is very possible.
This passage will be in Romans, of course, the heart of Romans, but we will also be in other passages.
We will approach it from two different angles. As we identify in Romans the three big areas that are stumbling blocks to change, how they manifest in our lives, how do I know that it is there? It's usually other people who notice it first. Part of the Lord's gentle or not so gentle conviction process.

We will be looking at each of those areas. First, the downward spiral of choices we make as human beings, and what it results in. What the Lord, as it says, gives us over to. "You've chosen that. You're determined on it. Try it. And you'll see that it doesn't produce the life you think."

There are three main areas of exchanges like that. Exchanges from the goodness that the Lord has created us for and the partnership with Him that enables it. The results that we know in our own lives, that we're impacted by with other people, that we see in the news every day.

Romans identifies how to deal effectively with each, how to recognize it and deal with these areas that are often under the radar, not visible. What's visible is the symptoms. We will go at each area and give examples, practical examples. Then we will take major common examples and show how addressing each of these areas really sets us free to move forward.

We will be approaching it both ways during these next weeks ahead. Our prayer is that all of us, every one of us, grow tremendously and gain the equipping to be able to pray effectively and actually help many others from God's word by His Spirit.

Tonight we get to be in the early part of Romans and then we will preview the three downward choices, which we'll really get into next week.

Paul's letter starts out, **"Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, one set apart under the good news of God, which was announced beforehand through His prophets and holy writings concerning His Son, who came from a seed of David according to the flesh, the one being set in power as the Son of God according to the Spirit of holiness, out of rising from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord."**

In this first part, Paul identifies himself as a servant of Jesus, called as an apostle. An apostle is a sent out one and set apart for the good news of God. Often that's translated the gospel, which is valid for sure. But it's easy to forget that it's the good news of God.

A lot of times we get a little afraid of sharing the gospel because we're so aware of people who are gun-shy and don't want the gospel shoved down their throat. But we forget that it's actually the good news of God, what God has offered and made available through Jesus, and that this is indeed amazing news that we have to proclaim, to share, and to demonstrate. And that "good news" actually comes up three times in this early passage, in verse 9 and in verse 15. This is a major theme of this beginning section and the whole of Romans. It is good news of what the Lord makes available.

There are three things that Paul mentions in his concise and pithy description of Jesus.

It made me think of various times when I or we have met with students, some of whom grew up in Christian families, but then when they got to Stanford, throughout their parents' faith and tried other things, and then came to real faith themselves.

I remember one in particular who grew up on the mission field. When she got to Stanford, she got deep into philosophy and became an atheist. She and her atheistic friends took philosophy and human reason as far as it could go. And they're very sharp analytical people, so they ran it way out.

They all discovered that it was empty, that the thing they longed for most was not there, which was actually the love of God. Love wasn't there. Intellect, yes. Logic, yes. But no life, no love. During COVID sheltering in, when everybody headed back to wherever they were going to, all the missionaries came home and the student came into real faith and saw the life of Jesus in these other believers and saw the good news in flesh and blood. She came back having given her life to Jesus, but then met with us right after COVID sheltering in was done and we were allowed back on campus and said, "I now know Jesus is real, but I have no intellectual support for my faith and now I'm back with my intellectual athlete atheistic friends who have all the arguments and objections that I used to have and I don't know how to answer them. Could we get together and build, could you give me that support?"

So she and I did. She was part of the class all the time during the rest of her time at Stanford.

These three verses made me think of it.

What is the evidence?

First, that Jesus was announced in detail centuries before he actually came. The Lord is predicting and it was completely fulfilled, though there's more to come with the second coming. If you read Matthew, especially, notes prophecy after prophecy that's fulfilled.

On the Emmaus road, Jesus himself was taking disciples back through what spoke of him in the Old Testament scriptures. They said, "Were not our hearts burning?" as he described this.

We would have loved to have been in on that conversation. There is so much specific foretelling that Jesus fulfilled in down to the detail. One example is Isaiah 53, the description of the crucifixion that liberal scholars thought for a long time was so specific it could not have been written until after the time of Jesus. Until a goat went up into a cave and a shepherd was throwing rocks to try to scare it out and heard broken crockery and discovered the Dead Sea Scrolls with copies in entirety that are readily datable to way before the time of Jesus.

Steve has read it in Hebrew, Isaiah 39 to 40 and other parts in the Hebrew Museum. Continue on the same page. Unbroken parchment.

These are such specific prophecies that are way ahead.

You and I could say, "I'm God" or "God's son," and it wouldn't mean a thing, but it was foretold in such detail.

And then some of the fulfillment: he's of the seed of David, according to the flesh, promised to David that he would have an heir of his, one of his seed that would reign forever.

That, of course, was Jesus.

And set in power as a son of God, according to the spirit of holiness, rising from the dead, Jesus Christ, our Lord.

As a friend of ours, a pastor used to say, "In spite of all of the advances in modern medicine, the death rate is a flat 100%."

We do not ever expect dead people to rise up.

But that too is predicted.

And Jesus did.

It was a powerful sign of an indestructible life as well as the payment for sin accepted and our justification, as Paul will say at the end of Romans 4.

There were many people, 500 and more, that he appeared to who could have denied it if it were not true.

I also mentioned to our students the promise of God that Jesus said, "If you can't believe my words, believe my works."

What he demonstrated in his life on earth and what he still promises and demonstrates in the life of anyone who comes to him.

He promises to complete what he's begun. To grow us into his beautiful character.

The Galatians 5:22-23: **"love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, being under the control of the Spirit."**

We have walked with many for decades and seen that exact character, their personality, but God's beautiful character develop even from people from very rough backgrounds.

The demonstration is there, the evidence is there for who Jesus is and the basis for truth.

Paul, of course, in a pithy way, capsulizes it in a few verses.

But it's good for us to think through what is the evidence.

We, Paul, received grace and apostleship.

That's favor and calling.

We know he did personally from Jesus on the road to Damascus.

Forever.

That road, to bring about the obedience of faith among all the nations on behalf of his name.

We'll get back to that key phrase in a moment, the obedience of faith.

Romans begins with that, and it ends with that in Romans 16.

It's the parentheses of what is enabled through the good news in the life of every human being who welcomes it.

We'll get into what that is.

"Among whom you also are the called of Jesus Christ."

They received grace and apostleship.

First of all, grace is favor. It's very broad, includes forgiveness. It also welcome.The Greek-speaking peoples of the Mediterranean would greet each other, say charis, grace. The Jewish people around the area would greet each other shalom. They received a welcome in and then apostleship ascending out. A lot happened in between.

The purpose of the sending out of some of those who had been welcomed in and then really learned what it was all about, not just in theory, not just as it's prophesied in Scripture and then fulfilled, but fulfilled in history and fulfilled in their lives personally, where they become personal witnesses of the transformation that God has brought about in their lives because of their relationship with Jesus and their relationship with the Heavenly Father through Jesus and receiving the Holy Spirit to reproduce and live out God's life in their own bodies through their personalities.

The message, the good news, results in the obedience of faith.

Obeying God has been a big issue all along. And we've known devout Jews today who are so thankful for God giving the Jews the law and say, "We are so privileged because God loves us enough to tell us how to succeed in life, what wise life looks like, whether it's in what I do or how I relate. This is wisdom for real, for good life."

We've known sincere, faith-filled Jews with the faith of Abraham who have said, "I don't try to obey to be good enough to be accepted by God. I obey out of thanksgiving to God for his gift of the wisdom of how to live."

It is very important that we unpack this phrase, "obedience of faith".

Faith is belief. But it's much more than that. The term that we translate as faith or belief comes from a root meaning to be persuaded. We are those who have been persuaded by the gospel, persuaded by the good news to welcome Jesus into our lives and to seek to follow him.

But it's more than just believe that. There are many people and, every once in a while, you see the results of a poll: How many Americans believe in God? It always comes out 90-something percent. But what do the people being asked the question think they're being asked? Do they believe that there is a God? Do they believe that God exists?

The term believe that occurs only once in the Bible. That is in James, where he says, "You say you believe. Well, the demons also believe and they shudder."

Believing that God is not saving faith. That is important recognition of reality. But it is not what saving faith is about. It is putting one's trust in the Lord, and in His word, and in His Spirit coming to indwell a believer, to reproduce the life of God and enable eternal life, which does include life after death, life in heaven, but much more.

Eternal life is first of all eternal. It is not at any particular time. It is at any time, all the time. But it is a particular something at any time, all the time. And Jesus defined it to find the essence of it, not the when of it, but the what of it by saying, as quoted in John 17 in his prayer, right after the upper room time with the disciples and on the way to Gethsemane to offer himself up for our sin, "And he said, this is eternal life, that they may know you," addressing God the Father, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you've sent.

Eternal life is a relationship. It's a spiritual relationship between God and those who put their trust in Him and receive His light to dwell in them and transform them and enable them to get to know Father and Son by the Spirit.

That's a relationship of all three members of the Godhead. One of them in me, in the believer, the other two out, but the life of the other two being in the believer by the Spirit.

Although it's a human being relating to God the Father and God the Son, it is also the communion of all three members of the Godhead that we get to participate in as closely as possible without actually being one of them.

This is really amazing what God invites us into. Receive grace, welcome to all who will welcome the invitation and what's offered with it.

To bring about the obedience of faith, this is radically different from most forms of obedience that we think of. Although this manifests itself in outward behavior, the essence of it is that it is the result of being persuaded in the truth and trusting in the God who reveals that truth to us and in Jesus who came to live as a human being on earth to show us what the Bible had been talking about all along.

If it's done well in the classroom, we understand the value, the demonstration in a laboratory class that may accompany the lecture.

This is the, let me show you what I've been telling you, that you may understand it better and that you may participate.

Obedience of faith comes from being persuaded that the truth is in fact true, and that Jesus is who he says he is and who Scripture says he is. Because of that, we cooperate. We're not cooperating because we're told to. We're cooperating because we are convinced that what we've been told is true and conforming to it, living it, is what leads to success in life.

When I'm convinced of that, when I'm obeying, I'm actually doing God's will, but I'm doing it because it's become my will to do that. It's become my will to obey God and become like Him. In terms of a specific instance, a specific issue, the obedience comes from the heart because I've internalized it as not only true information, valuable information, vital information, but I've internalized it as my will because I'm convinced that it's true.

Because I'm convinced that the one who has demonstrated it as a human being, and as proclaimed it through the prophets in the Old Testament, through the apostles in the New Testament, is trustworthy. Although we do serve God by participating, cooperating in what He is doing and invites us to join Him in doing, we don't do it like a slave. Later in Romans, Paul will point out that even if it were a master-slave relationship, the logical thing to do would be to obey and cooperate.

But it's way beyond that. We obey, in fact, but we do so on a much higher level. It's really cooperation because of trust in His goodness. So it's, I trust Him. It's not just my being good, my following rules. It's because of trust and it's participation with Him.

And so, it's good. It results in good for me and for those I impact. That's His goal and our goal in our own lives: to join with Him, to live life according to His character, which is now mine, knowing that it is good and through cooperative trust.

Steve was talking earlier, as we were preparing, about Philippians chapter 2: "To work out your salvation with fear and trembling."

In the announcement that you got: yes, work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Positive fear, recognizing the importance of God and that He is right. And so it's really important, and trembling, recognizing the seriousness of the damage that departing from the truth that God declares and the lifestyle He calls us to really hurts.

We all have done lots of it and are continuing to do lots while we're learning to do more and more, walking by faith and obeying, cooperating.

Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.

This is what Romans is talking about: how to work out your salvation. Because it's God who is at work in you both to will—that's the obedience of faith—and to work—that's the obedience of faith—for His good pleasure.

And that's the third part: as we move from the level of children of God to sons of God, where our relationship becomes a mature one of taking up responsibility from our heavenly Father, that this again comes from the heart.

So it's cooperative. It's something we do with Him, not for Him, not apart from Him, but His invitation to live life with Him and live it well.

Alan put it well in the paper he wrote and shared with us about just what we're teaching now as he was working on it: He won't do it to us and we can't do it for Him. It requires cooperation. It's both.

We'll be getting into specifics through the rest of the quarter. But these are the bookmarks: it's the goal right at the beginning of Romans, and then again in chapter 16, verse 26, he finishes with, "This is the goal that we get to grow in ourselves and encourage one another forward."

So, now, where do the people in Rome come into this? Among whom you also, verse 6, are called the call of Jesus Christ.

To all those being beloved of God in Rome—that God loves the whole world, but those who are being beloved, that is, in practice, receiving the benefits of God's love that can be appropriated only by choosing to welcome them, because God does not force Himself or anything on us. Those being beloved to God in Rome, called to be holy ones, grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

He is writing to the church in Rome, which is Jews and Gentiles together. He includes grace and peace in His greeting to them.

And the beautiful thing is He has never met them. And that's part of God's plan.

Paul wanted to get to them for a long time, but the Lord held him until he wrote what he would have longed to have taught.

He is addressing those who are called of God. They are called out. They have heard the call and responded. They are beloved in Rome.

Rome was the most cosmopolitan city of the ancient world at that time. All nations were there, even from China. People from all nations.

The Lord had reached people from all nations. They were seated throughout the city, just as in our 51 years at Stanford in ministry, let alone before that as students, we encountered believers that the Lord had seated in all levels of the university at Stanford.

You are His beloved. You have the gift of His favor and deep well-being from the Father and the Son.

And again, many believers, because of experience with earthly fathers, are afraid of God the Father. But because their earthly father was not good news. But here are heavenly fathers, and Jesus extends favor and deep well-being to each of us, beloved, wherever you are.

And it's good to know that as you minister to people wherever you are: he's called to be an apostle and they are called of Jesus Christ, called to be holy ones.

Holy: yes, it's a high and holy term, but the essence of it is to be whole, to be whole, complete, to be what we should be, to see the potential that God has created and has fulfilled.

We are holy ones because we have the Holy Spirit within. We have the character of God Himself which we are growing into in practice, welcoming in practice. That is why each one of you are called saints. It does not mean we are always exemplary saints in practice, but we are saints. We are filled with the Holy Spirit and growing.

Moreover, the term for church that occurs in the New Testament is the called out ones. God calls everyone that all who will may come. But it takes response. To enter into the gospel, it takes mutual agreement. That is part of the wonder of God's working, that He did not make us like the loyal angels who are perfect. They have no choice. That is just the way they are.

It is pointed out that we know things and we experience things that fascinate angels. And I think the fascination is they are looking and saying, "Will it actually work? Does grace actually work?" Only if the Holy Spirit is there.

You get that at the end of 1 Peter chapter 1, the angels standing on tippy-toe looking at the wonder of what God is accomplishing in all of us. And that comes up a pastor I knew early on in my equipping had gone to visit a church and he was going there as a— He was talking with the pastor, and they were seeing how much they agreed on and so forth. But then the pastor, when he got there, was very much preaching law and the hellfire damnation. "You better obey God or else."

And he questioned it about grace. "What about grace? These people are under grace." And the response was, and this is not rare, the response was, "Well, you know that, and I know that, but they're not ready for it. I need to use law and threat to force them to do it."

Will grace actually work? And the answer is yes. Will people use free will? Yes, they'll use free will to walk away. But then will they come back of their free will? Spirit is there, they will.

**"Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ."**

Now he talks about them and his awareness of them as still never having come and seen them. This is God working behind the scenes. Paul was eager to tell them, but he had not taught them. He didn't know what they did and didn't know. So he just has to unload the whole wagon load on them, which all of us benefit from.

Believers for centuries have benefited from Paul penning all of Romans because he didn't know what they knew. He would have said it verbally, but we have it all in writing, which is such a gift from the Holy Spirit.

And all the rest of the New Testament letters address specific issues. Some of them address several issues, but none sets forth the dynamics and mechanics of the Christian walk of the new life systematically and in detail from start to finish.

So now we'll read verses 8 through 15. But the thing to listen for is what was Paul's approach in his ministry to this church he had never met? Because there are some real keys for us as we serve both with people we've never met, as well as people that we do.

It's helpful to look over Paul's shoulder and see how this very amazing, effective servant of the Lord approached other people in ministry to learn.

And first we have verse eight: **"First, I thank my God indeed through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is proclaimed throughout the world."**

Paul hasn't had a chance to teach them anything yet, and what's his first awareness? God is working in them already. God doesn't need Paul to bring about faith in practice such that people are hearing about it all over the place. And I think that's good for Paul to recognize. It helps him to take his exalted place in the working of New Testament times, the apostolic era, to take it with humility. He gets to make a major, even unique contribution, a unique degree of contribution. But he's not indispensable. The beautiful thing is he starts with thanksgiving for them and for what God is doing among them. That comes up in every New Testament epistle. It was his constant practice. It's where he started, even with churches like Corinth that were a pain in many different areas. He always starts with thanksgiving. That’s a good key for us with people that we live with, are close to, or are seeking to serve.

We're sometimes aware that they're not particularly easy or lovely any more than we are at times. To start with thanksgiving for what God is doing in their lives is a very good place to start: thanksgiving for their faith, for their trust, even if it's a little here, it's a lot. It's been proclaimed throughout the whole Mediterranean world, amazing that there are people of faith in Rome and there are.

**"For my witness is the God whom I serve by my spirit in the good news of His Son, as I make mention of you unceasingly, always in my prayers beseeching, if now somehow at last I shall succeed by the will of God to come to you."**

Another aspect as we look at how Paul ministered and how he approached service to other believers that we can learn from is that he is praying unceasingly. The remarkable thing is he's praying for people he's never met and might never meet. How often do we do that? We have an opportunity to be a powerful part of the Lord's working in people's lives. I even take the news as something to pray from. There's so much to pray over.

We always want to start being active and talking in our ministry to people. But it really starts with prayer, even if we do have the opportunity to talk with them. I wish I'd known that more as we were raising our children. When you can talk directly with them, it's easy to put the focus there instead of the first focus being praying for them and then joining with the Lord in what He's already doing in their lives.

Paul, who the Lord used to turn the Roman Empire upside down, to seed faith everywhere in his lifetime, in his ministry, is a powerful man of prayer. He walked lots of places, just like Jesus did. I'm sure he was praying. We use our car as a prayer box, communication box. But it's easy to put the focus on planning and on speaking and doing. Paul knows the importance of speaking to the Lord on behalf of others.

And I'm glad as our children have grown and are doing well in the Lord, that I have the opportunity to still be part of their inner lives through prayer. And it's true with people in general.

It says now, verses 11 and 12, **"I long to see you in order that I may share a spiritual gift with you in order for you to be established. And that is to be mutually encouraged in one another's faith, yours and also mine."** This is beautiful because it's helpful to see what it is that he longs to accomplish if he gets to visit, which he did, but not as he expected as a free man, but instead as Caesar's prisoner. He still was able to serve from his rented prison. His first goal is that they be established.

That's actually a very interesting term that is very key. It shows up in the Old Testament in Isaiah 62. Isaiah 62:6-7 says, "On your walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen all day and all night. They will never keep silent. You who remind the Lord, take no rest for yourselves and give Him no rest until He establishes and makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth."

That establish is really confirmed in their faith and in their walk with the Lord, in their trust. Steadfastly set is another way of thinking about it. It is a goal in ministry that comes up in many places. It has the sense of strength, and Paul longs to strengthen them in their trust in the Lord, in their walk with Him.

And that's a goal. It is easy not to really have a goal as we meet with people. But if I have my goal as, I want to participate with You, Lord, in helping to strengthen this person in their walk with You. Then I can be alert to ways to encourage forward, to equip a little bit more, and use those times—even a few minutes, or a text or an email—to encourage this person forward in their trust in the Lord and walk with Him.

As we do that, there's a lot of powerful ministry that can be done wherever we are if we really have that as our goal. And there are many passages about that and a lot of it has to do with being established through the truth. As we share Scripture with them, share God's Word, even a little bit, it encourages them forward and helps to ground them so that they stay walking with Him rather than just when they are aware of a current need. And so that's a very important goal that Paul has: that you be established and that you be mutually encouraged in one another's faith, yours and mine.

Paul is not presenting himself as the great high mucky-muck who is speaking to peons—that does not go over well—but he always expects that it will be a mutual encouragement.

That is a real key for our ministries as well, that no matter who we meet with, even a brand new believer or someone who is searching and coming toward faith, it will always be a mutual gift, which it will be because of the Lord, not because of me, the great one, downloading on you, the peon.

These are real keys in ministering well, in representing God.

This is verse 13:

**"I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, that I have often purposed to come to you, but I have been prevented until the present, in order that I may obtain some fruit among you as also among the rest of the Gentiles."** Paul gets a sense of leading from the Lord to come and teach and encourage among these people. But the opportunity doesn't happen. He said he's been praying and praying and praying for it.

And there again, it takes both. When it comes to being called out from the world in its ways into faith and new life in Christ, God offers, but it doesn't happen until we accept the invitation. Once we are His, then growth is on the same basis. The Lord is constantly offering, and we're taking up a little bit here and a little bit there, bit by bit, as we become persuaded about specifics.

We become more obedient by faith because we have come to trust and have confidence that this additional thing is true and is life.

Paul prays, and he prays about specifics, but he has to wait until the Lord ratifies it. It's always both God's will and our will together that moves things ahead.

It is helpful to know God always answers prayer. Sometimes it's yes, sometimes it's no, and sometimes it's not yet. It's easy for us to be restive and say, "Come on, Lord, this is a good thing. I'm praying for what, why the wait? Why isn't it happening?" But the Lord is accomplishing much more than we have in mind.

Has God answered your prayer? Obviously God has answered your prayer. The question is, has God answered your prayer about this or that? How has God answered so far?

Now, it says, "I'm under obligation to Greeks and to barbarians, to the wise and the foolish." We're used to thinking of the Jews and the Gentiles, the Greeks, but Paul is actually looking at it with three groups.

They are the group that are in historically, and not all individuals are the Lord's because Israel is the Lord's people. Paul, who would love to minister to fellow Jews, has been told no, because I need you to do what would not be done if you are one more of many faithful ones ministering in Israel: the Greeks primarily.

Then the barbarians, the Jews of the non-Jewish people, termed Gentiles, the nations by Jews. There are the Greeks and the barbarians, divided by language and everything else that goes with that.

To the wise and the foolish. Wise may be a little tongue in cheek there. Read 1 Corinthians 1 about wisdom.

And to the wise and the foolish, thus as for me, **"I'm eager to proclaim the good news to you also who are in Rome."**

One note: we tend to think of proclaiming the good news as evangelism, but he is writing to believers in Rome. So this is good news to encourage them forward in their actual walk with the Lord, which is where the main part of the heart of Romans goes. It is written to believers.

How do I actually cooperate with the Lord to grow and to show Him forth and be part of His work in a broken world? It is starting in me. And so instead of just evangelism, which Paul did a lot of—his passion to reach those who had never been reached—here the good news is proclaimed to believers who already have faith but, like all of us, have a huge amount of growth ahead.

Every believer has faith in essence. We spend our lives coming to faith in practice in more and more specific areas in application.

Now the really key pivot here, verses 16 and 17:

**"I am not ashamed of the gospel because
The power of God unto salvation for all those exercising faith,
To the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith unto faith,
As it is written, 'The righteous one is to live by faith.'"**

People who are opposed to the gospel will work hard—and you no doubt have experienced it—to dump a shame trip on you that you're a Christian. Christianity is a crutch. Why do you need a crutch?

We're acquainted with, didn't know personally, a man who has done amazing philanthropic things. Wonderful things, very good in themselves, very helpful, affecting many people very positively. And he was surrounded by a bunch of believers who knew him personally. He would say to them, if you just had more people like me, you wouldn't need your God. He died that way.

"I'm not ashamed of the gospel. It's the power of God. Gospel is not about being weak. It's recognizing that in my natural strength, I am weak, but I have great power available in God. Power of God unto the salvation of those exercising faith."

Salvation from what? Starting in verse 18, Paul is going to be talking about salvation from what? And we'll get into that next week. But the salvation from the state, the influence, the practices, the attitudes of this fallen world, which all centers in what started in the garden.

"I don't need God. I can figure it out for myself. Judging by sight, as God does, what's good and what's evil. So I can see what's right and what's wrong. And by the way, I'm right. And everybody who agrees with me proves it. Therefore, everybody else is wrong. So what's wrong with you? You don't agree with me."

We don't need to be convinced that this world needs to be saved from its corrupt state. The problem is becoming convinced that I'm a part of that world that needs to be saved from the natural state. It's easy for me to see faults in other people. It's difficult for me to admit faults in myself. At the end of Romans 1 and into Romans 2, Paul will use that as a pivot, and we'll talk about it when we get there.

It's the power for salvation. It's the power to be raised from all these ungodly things that we see around us all the time. People who don't really have a concept of God would still look and be able to say these things are ungodly. It may be what they're thinking is if there were a God, it wouldn't be like this. And in it, the righteousness of God is revealed from faith into faith. And I'm clustering here from grace, faith into greater faith. As I come to trust that something God says in His word is right, rather than what I have thought was right, I become aware of more of God's righteousness, and I start to participate in it.

As I do that, as I see that something God declares in His word and is proclaimed by believers and demonstrated in other people's lives who are trusting God and becoming more and more like Him, as I see that that is right, I gain eyes to see more that God declares as His will and His offer to us is also right.

And so it's a progressive awakening to the reality of what is truly right and what is truly godlike and what is truly desirable in a human being and truly what leads to fulfillment including genuine love for others.

And as it is written, this is quoting from Hosea, "the righteous one is to live by faith." Righteousness is God's character, perfect character, complete character, is to live by faith. That life happens, real life happens when I trust God, not just accept what He says is true, but when I live accordingly.

And that really is an element, an expression of eternal life. As Jesus defined it, as mentioned earlier, this is eternal life, "that they may know you, God the Father, and Jesus Christ, whom you sent."

And the better I know the Lord, Father and Son, and the more I come to understand and learn to rely on the power and leading of the Holy Spirit within me, the more I truly live. And the more I have a truly life-giving, life-encouraging influence on others.

This, of course, was one of the pivotal verses that began the Reformation, where Luther realized that faith wasn't just trying to be good, trying to earn acceptance, as he had tried and tried and proven his own weakness and inability and frustration and despair.

And instead he came to realize through Romans, "the righteous one by faith shall live." And it helps to recognize because out of this came the concept of justification by faith.

Justification is being made righteous. And in the Greek, it's the same root. Righteous and just are different English translations of the same term.

And to become justified and to go back to Abraham, who is called the father of the faithful, because in Abraham, we first see declared somebody being pronounced righteous because of faith. And that is being in righteous standing before God.

That's judicial righteousness, which is an important part of relating to God. But then there's also practical righteousness, which is God's character being lived out. And so you can really take each, pray from each word of this, thanking the Lord that if you have received Jesus, you are righteous. You're aligned with the Lord, filled with His beautiful character. You can live abundant life, living out, trusting Him to grow in that character from faith to faith more and more by faith. It's cooperative. I'm trusting Him to grow in His character, which He's given me at the core. It's progressive, from faith to faith, and I will grow more and more. The more I grow, the more I will grow as I trust Him.

There is so much here, but it's the power of God for salvation. It's the power to grow into who I am, rightly aligned with the Lord, filled with His beautiful character. As I trust Him, I get to grow into the practice of it more and more.

We'll be looking specifically at how—and how is it that coming to trust God makes a person righteous in standing before God? We see it elsewhere in numerous places in Scripture that God looks at the heart when He judges.

The question of righteousness, judicial righteousness, acceptance as being righteous, is by faith because faith is determining at heart—that is, at the core of my being, the seat of motivation—when I determine to trust God and to trust Him for what He promises in His word, spoken directly to Abraham and in Scripture ever since.

Then that makes me a righteous person, even though I have not become any more righteous in practice yet. Justification—coming to be righteous at heart—is the start. Sanctification, which is the power of God unto salvation.

Now we're talking about salvation, not in the initial point of accepting the gospel, accepting God's promise of life, and accepting Jesus into my heart, nor the culmination, glorification, which is being saved not only from the motivation to sin but from the presence of sin.

Sanctification, which is what is referred to most of the time in the New Testament about salvation, is the process of being saved progressively in practice and moving from practicing that which is sinful, which is not according to God's design and intent for us, to coming to live and practice what is sure.

Next week, we will pick up with verse 18, where Paul explains the effects of the fall and how it corrupts our relationship with God in all three dimensions. That then will become the basis when we start into Romans 5:5-8 of seeing how God's process of salvation in practice redeems us in terms of each of those things, brings, allows us to transcend and have victory over the corruption in each of the three arenas of life: our motivation, our practice as an individual, and our relations with others. Starting next week, it will get very practical because first it's the downward spiral, which is the rest of Romans 1, which identifies choices that all human beings, including us, have made, often unknowingly even, and what results from it. We don't often recognize the fundamental choices that we've made. It's just how we live.

The deceitfulness of sin—we don't really realize the implication. What shows up are the symptoms, what comes from it. And so we'll see there are three exchanges where we as fallen people, but also we continue it as believers in many areas of our lives where we're still thinking as if we were not believers. In practice, it's such a given.

There are three exchanges, three places where we as human beings choose something other than what the Lord has created and called us for, and what in practice results from it. That will be a very helpful diagnostic for our own growth and for helping others, because it helps us to identify what the root is that's keeping us stuck.

We may be praying to change, trying to change, and just seem like we're hardwired. It's just who I am. And in fact, as you understand what the core is underneath, with the Lord, by faith and cooperation, we can address those underlying issues that keep us stuck and then proactively start actual change.

We have grown so much in our own lives and enabled so many to grow in very practical areas. This is exciting material.

Paul, as Steve said, will address each specific area as we move forward in the core of Romans and tell us what the keys are to be able to come out of the old into the new in practice.

So that's what's ahead. That's what's starting next week. We look forward to sharing this and really working it out in practical examples.

Starting in Genesis 1, the way God works, He works—there are three steps to development. Then there is an ongoing state that results from the combination of those three.

That is the same thing we have here: at the end of Romans 1, we see the result of the state, which is what we see around us all the time, because it came into being through the fall and it is still the way things are.

In Romans 5 to 8, we will see the three steps of redemption from those three things, and then beginning of Romans 12, we get the ongoing condition in believers. So we'll pick this up again next week.

> Lord Jesus, thank You that though this can sound very remote and academic, it is not. Your life, Your good news that You make available to us is the power of God for growth, for growing into who we are now as new creations, moving forward from faith to faith. We get to know You better through these very areas of growth and through partnering with You. Thank you that it's very much a trust and cooperative approach. And we get to know you so well in the midst of growing into your beautiful character and being set free in areas where we've been stuck and helping others.

> Thank you for what's ahead. Thank you for delaying Paul long enough to write the letter of Romans and how much is there for all to see if we will take time to really consider it and walk it out in practice. Thank you for each of our brothers and sisters.

> Please lead us back into the text to welcome and thank you and revel in what you make available to all of us and to take up the approach of joining with you to bless others and serve in the lives of others that we see in Paul.

> Thank you, Lord, for your work among us. In your name, amen.
