> All right, Lord Jesus, we're so thankful for this opportunity to gather together in Your name, to be in Your word. Lord, we thank You for this Ash Wednesday, where we remember You and Your journey towards the cross.

> Lord, thank You for the immeasurable gift that You won for us in Your obedience and going to the cross, that we might know Your forgiveness, Your salvation, the depth of Your love. And Lord, thank You that You've given us Your life as a result by sending Your Spirit.

> Lord, we thank You for these weeks that we've been in Romans and getting a deeper and a fuller view of Your call for us, as well as how You've empowered us to walk with You and walk by Your Spirit and to make real change and real progress that delights You and fills us with Your life and delights others.

> Lord, we ask that, as we're in Romans 5 and 6 tonight, that You would underline for each of us a text that's truth, that's from You for us. Lord, we ask that it would take root in our hearts and that it would spring up and grow and bear fruit in our lives this week. Lord, we thank You for the powerful truths that are in the text tonight, and Lord, we ask that You would guide our time as we feast on them.

> Pray this song in Your name. Amen.

Last week we looked at the three steps in overview, and we focused a lot on why these three steps. We looked at, there are three exchanges in Romans 1 that categorize all the ways in which we reject the Lord and His call and design for us to glorify Him, to express Him.

And then in Romans 5, we looked at how there are three boasts where we are boasting in the hope of what God is eager and available to do in our lives. And we saw the connection between the exchanges and the boasts and how the boasts is the hope that the Lord gives us to overcome the effects of the exchanges from Romans 1.

And then, of course, we've been talking about the three steps, which are us joining the Lord and partnering with Him in order to rise up out of the downward spiral and into closer walk and fellowship, and really glory with Him.

And with that, we also looked at how this is the pattern, how the Lord communicates with us in all of Scripture. We looked at Genesis and our call there. And then we, I think it was in the online class, looked at the Godhead and many other examples of how we have three essential elements in all of life. And those elements are first the motivation, or the purpose, that dimension; and then the execution and practice, the activity; and then thirdly, the relationship, or the fruit, the benefit.

I think the good news is, because these are the three dimensions, with the three steps we're confident, we can be confident, that these are the three that we need to take in order to fully come out of the lifestyle of sin and begin walking with the Lord in newness of life.

This week, we get the opportunity to take a much closer look at step one. As we mentioned last week, each step has the hope for taking the step, the resource that we need in order to take the step, and then the mechanics of taking the step itself, and then where that leaves us after we've taken the step. We'll get to look at that today.

 Let's start in Romans 5:12. And the resource that we're given to take step one is in 5:12 to 21 at the end. So I'll just read a couple of verses at a time, and then we'll begin.

**Therefore, just as through one man sin entered into the world, and death through sin, and death spread to all men because all sinned. For until the law, sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those who had not sinned in the likeness of the offense of Adam, who was a type of Him who was to come.**

**But the free gift is not like the transgression. For if by the transgression of the one the many died, much more did the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to the many. And the gift is not like that which came through the one who sinned, for on the one hand the judgment arose from one transgression, resulting in condemnation, but on the other hand the free gift arose from many transgressions, resulting in justification.**

**For if by the transgression of the one death reigned through the one, much more those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of the righteousness will reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ. So then, as through one transgression there resulted condemnation to all men, even so through one act of righteousness there resulted justification of life to all men.**

**For as through the one man's disobedience the many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one the many will be made righteous. And the law came in that the transgression might increase, but where sin increased, grace abounded all the more, that as sin reigned in death, even so grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.**

We can summarize that. Actually, it could be laid out in a table of three columns. We have each element of what characterized Adam in the fall and each element in Jesus in His salvation, and then a comparison. To run through that, it's showing that those nine elements are not just a random list. They actually are a systematic categorical analysis, and it can be laid out in a table. It comes up three by three. We don't need to go into the details of it, but again, the triadic fractal nature of everything God does and the way He communicates and so forth.

The point in seeing that is to note that it's complete. That's the significance for us. To summarize it as two parallel summarized statements: Adam's offense, which was disobedience and transgression, led to sin, death, judgment, and condemnation for all. All became sinners, and sin reigned in death. That is, sin was exercising sovereign authority, absolute authority, life and death authority, and causing death.

The parallel, which is totally to our benefit, Jesus' free gift through the obedience of Christ to God resulted in justification for all, and believers are made righteous. Believers will reign in life, and grace reigns through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ.

I'd like to make a few comments about some of the specific verses before we move on. This begins with, "As through one man, sin entered the world, and through sin, death, and thus death passed through him to all persons because all sinned."

And various believers say, "Doggone it, if only Adam and Eve hadn't bitten into that fruit, we would be fine." And this says otherwise. This says, yes, we inherit a tendency from Adam, but we've all acted on the tendency. All of us, as it's said in Genesis 3, all of us judge by sight what is good and what is evil, what seems to us by sight, by our own judgment, will lead to goodness and life and thriving for me and for those that I care about, and what will lead to forms of death that I want to avoid. And by my judgment, I'm smart enough to figure it out myself.

And we all have different opinions about what's good and what's evil, so it leads to tremendous conflict, as we all know, within families, marriages, the news. It's exactly what the Lord says will come from our arrogant thinking that we can figure things out ourself without Him. And we inherit that tendency, but we all act on it.

And you see that from early on. People talk about the terrible twos, where children discover that they too can say no. It actually starts earlier. From experience, we all are pretty opinionated, and we have come up with different judgments. And so it's a disease that we all have, that we've all acted on, and it leads to many forms of death. It's not just physical death. It includes that, but it can be depression, anger, bitterness, the whole range of forms of death and separation that is painful. And that's the result of thinking that we can do it on our own.

Professing to be wise, as Romans 1 said, they became fools. And we've all been foolish, according to the Lord's definition. The fool is the one who says, "I can figure it out. I don't need God." And we've all done that.

But the beautiful thing is this. We combine those: wise, fool, foolish. And actually, if you've gone to college, you have been officially a wise fool, because that's what a sophomore is. That's what it means. Your second year of school, you've been branded a wise fool. It's usually the worst year, too. But the beautiful thing is, thinking you're really wise, by the time the second year comes around, you realize, no, you're not.

Steve has said you can break this into three columns, and the relation between the two is down the center. And what you see three times is "much more." Rather than being stuck in the old, the tendency that came from Adam and the death and the condemnation that came from that, what Jesus accomplishes more than gets us back to the garden. That's not good enough. It's much more that He accomplishes. And that comes up in verse 15, in verse 16, in verse 17. The comparison of what Jesus does in the face of this evil delivers us into a state that is much more than where Adam was, that we have life far beyond that in deep relationship with Him.

And verse 17 especially, I'd like to highlight, we could spend a quarter on these verses, so that's why we're highlighting instead of going in depth. We're hopefully whetting your appetite to go deeper. But verse 17: **"If by the trespass of the one man death reigned through the one"**, (death is what always happens in the natural world. It's a broken world) **"Much more those receiving the grace and the gift of righteousness will reign in life through the one Jesus Christ."**

And that's all of us as believers, that we have received His favor, His grace, and the gift of righteousness, the gift of His life. We've already seen in Romans 5 the Holy Spirit has been poured out within our hearts to the last drop. That's the form of the Greek, that it means that we have hope that we can count on because the Holy Spirit has been poured out in our hearts to the last drop. We will grow up to be like our Lord, and it is being accomplished.

We have the gift of righteousness. We're not only not condemned, we have His favor, but now we have His character as well. And righteousness, the Greek word is aligned with dikaios. We're aligned with Him at the core in our character now, and we get to grow into it in practice. But what we have available to us is to reign in life, not just cope. I hate the word "cope." But instead to reign, I don't need to just be reacting to whatever's happening. If someone is unfair or unkind or downright ugly, instead of reacting, I can overcome evil with good as I trust the Lord to bring His character of forgiveness. And I can overcome rather than just react as I would have, and reign over what would come naturally from within.

There was a wonderful little story about a friend of Ray Stedman's who was a pastor at PPC for about 50 years, and Howard Hendricks was his good friend. And Howard Hendricks, who has a terrific dry sense of humor, was preaching as a guest preacher at a church and then greeting people afterwards. And he saw a friend he hadn't seen for a long time, and, "Hey, Joe, how are you doing?" And the answer was, "All right, under the circumstances." And he shot back, "What are you doing under there?" None of us need to live under the circumstances anymore. We can reign in life as we learn to walk with the Lord and seek His wisdom instead of just react, and live more and more according to the new character we have. And so we'll be getting into more of how to do that.

But the other wonderful implication of this, there are many, but another one is your heritage does not need to define who you are, because our heritage is from Adam. And a lot of times, especially as you live longer in life, you begin to see how there are inherited tendencies that have come down through the generations that I said I would never do, and now I am, or I am living a complete reaction to it, which means it's still the reference point. And it can be, I can look back and see generations of anger, and that's what I just drop into when things seem out of control and I need to somehow take charge, or bitterness.

I had a dear lady who, even though her life was actually quite good, just was so bitter. And as we talked about it together, realized her mom had been very bitter, and she just picked up that attitude and carried it right into her life even though it was not warranted. And it was just a breakthrough for her to realize, I don't have to continue that inherited tendency. I can break it in my generation.

And if you look at Jesus' genealogy, it's quite a genealogy. There's Tamar, and there's prostitutes. There's David with Bathsheba, murdered and was killed, lived with someone else's wife, took someone else's wife. There's a whole series of train wrecks in His background and His genealogy, but it did not define who He was. And that's the position we're in. We're not only forgiven, we have His favor, but we have His character to reign over the inherited tendencies as well as the ones I'm clever enough to come up with myself.

And as we look at this section from Romans 5:12 to the end of the chapter, it's really this categorical comparison between Adam and Jesus. And it's what are the results that are generated from living life on that basis? And Romans 5:12 says, **"As through one man sin entered into the world, and death through sin, death spread to all men because all sinned,"** And later we'll see death reigns. We'll see sin reigning, and we'll see death reigning as a result of living on the same basis as Adam, who disobeyed.

And in contrast, we see the hope of living on the same basis of our Lord Jesus, of getting to reign in life, and then grace reigning in our lives unto eternal life, unto getting to know our Heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus more and more in the experience of life. And it's important to recognize we're not just getting back to the garden. Many people think that this is all about trying to get back to their garden. No.

God created man. **"Let Us make man in our image according to our likeness and let them rule."** Ruling, our contemporary term, manage, to exercise. It's executive management. It's not just line management, like being a slave or, "Do this, you do it. Do that, you do it." There's intelligent consideration in carrying out responsibility. But the result of all this is reigning in life. It's to reign, is to exercise sovereign authority, life-and-death authority, not just administrative authority.

We go from responsibility and authority to carry out that responsibility, then to completely ruining that, and then getting to a level we've never been at before, the level at which God operates. We become His allies, proceed from being children to learning to serve, and then eventually, as we get to Romans 8, to be sons, and that's being given responsibility, given total responsibility, to manage that which the Father has entrusted.

It's not just doing what is on Daddy's punch list. It's taking full responsibility for it. That's what inheritance is about. Inheritance is something that is entrusted to the heir, and the party giving the inheritance no longer manages that.

And we get to learn to do it in the character of Christ, which is now our partnership. And when we talk about reigning, we're talking about this. This is the imagery of a courtroom. Not like our courtroom, not a judicial courtroom, but a throne room of a sovereign, of a king.

Like in the courtroom of the king, it's the sovereign. The sovereign has the ability to determine life and death.

Yes, exactly. And it's the life-and-death factor. And the way we exercise life and death is in our own body, in this body in which we live during our life on earth.

And we start out being under the sovereign control of sin, being slaves of sin because of what is also in this body, which actually was our nature out of the fall. But then, as we become new creatures in Christ, living in this same physical body, which is still indwelt by what Paul terms the flesh, as opposed to the Spirit of God, that nature and style of life that come down to us from Adam, who decided to take a DIY approach to life. "And God says what to do, but hey, there are other options. I'm going to check them out." Anyway, we then start to exercise sovereign authority, and we see that in expressions like putting to death the practices of the flesh. That's exercising sovereign authority over the use of my body. We will get into that later on as it comes up.

But yeah, I think, with that note on reign, I'm very struck by the verse that Erica highlighted, verse 17, and that those who receive the gift of righteousness will reign in life through the one Jesus Christ. And I think we all as believers have asked that question: How do I reign in life? And we've seen examples of others in certain areas where they're reigning over what's coming at them in ways that we're still learning how to, or we couldn't even imagine how they're doing it yet.

And as I think about what it means to reign in life, it's instead of saying I'm under the circumstances that are coming my way, that are happening to me, or the mess that I'm creating for myself, as the case may be, it's really joining the Lord and saying, "Lord, yes, these things are happening, but I always get to go to You in how I respond to these things, and I always have my life in You, regardless of what the wind and waves of the circumstances of life bring us."

Last night, Erica gave a fun example of often worry becomes this thing that we like to do. And I think Erica mentioned she had a grandma that created lists of things to worry about. The title, instead of "Things to Pray About," the title was "Things to Worry About." She was honest about it.

And I did suggest that prayer was more effective, but she thought worry was more effective.

I'm not sure she thought of it in terms of effective. When she was worrying, she was actively expressing concern for her loved ones. Her daughter is going to be driving the car, taking children to and from school. She can worry about her safety. She ended up with my uncle in Australia, and she wrote me and said, "Please let me know what's going on. I may not be able to do anything, but at least I can worry." It was her way of caring. I think by the end of her life she started to pray, but I'm not sure.

I think with that, as believers we've all experienced how anxiety and worry can make us just so unfruitful in relation to the Lord and with others and personally. I felt the difference between worrying about something versus praying about it is the difference between death reigning and reigning in life.

It was a helpful illustration because for me, when I hear "reign in life," it paints a very strong picture that I'm excited about, but I'd like to make it more concrete. That was a helpful concrete example for me.

It's gotten even more concrete for me, and we'll spend a session on anxiety, I think. But I realized that part of what happens when I'm worrying is I'm trying to be in control of that situation, that I'm trying to know the possible things that could happen so I'm ready to do something about it. But I can never know all of the possible things that could happen. There are too many moving players and too many changes. But the One who is in control is the Lord.

And so as I learned to turn my trying to be in control, being uptight, anxious, to try to be there to make good decisions, instead to keep entrusting things to the One who is in control, then it's effective. Then I can be resting in Him, going with Him, and actually be fruitful instead of tied in knots, with the focus on me and fearfully toward others, instead of, "Lord, what if I'm entrusting this to You? Thank You that You're here. What can we do about this?" Reign in life through Jesus, not through being in control.

Yes, exactly. We're seated with Him in the heavenlies, not by ourselves. Ephesians 1, the end.

I think the last thing that I would like to bring up from this section is just that word "abundance" and "abound." In verse 15, we see **the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus, abound to the many**. Then in verse 17, we see **the abundance of the grace and the gift of righteousness** that we receive, enabling us to **reign in life through Jesus Christ**. In verse 20, **"where sin increased, grace abounded all the more."** We see this abounding and abundance of God's grace.

It's really an amazing gift that we've been given. And I think the proper response is to say, "Wow, Lord, let's get going and living in the new as my Lord Jesus, rather than living in the old as Adam did."

But that question is where Paul goes in Romans 6:1. And it says, **"What shall we say then? Are we to continue in sin so that grace may increase?"** And I think the question initially sounds kind of ridiculous. If God enjoys forgiving sin, or if the more sin there was, the more grace abounded, the more I have His favor, just think of the opportunity I'm giving Him. It's the cheap grace. I'll swipe the credit card with no responsibility.

But really what this is saying is actually more deep than that. And we actually do see this in our own lives. Sanctification is hard and I still have grace, and I can still live on that basis. I can still live on the basis of the old for now, and it's not a big deal, right? And Paul is asking, is it true that it's not a big deal? Is it true that living on the basis of the old doesn't matter?

And in verse 2, **"May it never be,"**, literally "not even possibly!" **"How shall we who died to sin still live in it?"** And a lot of times we end up living this way, as Allan's been saying: I'm forgiven. I know I'm going to heaven, so it's easy to just coast. And when I coast, it is the flesh, it's the old that I tend to coast in. It's just what comes naturally, and what comes naturally is what I'm used to.

As we'll get into in the latter part of Romans 6, I have deep habits in returning to the old. And it takes active steps to recognize and welcome what I've now been given and make the most of it instead of just saying, "I'm not going to roast for it. I'm going to get to go to heaven, so does it really matter?" It leads to complacency in between instead of saying it matters a lot.

And the only thing that matters is which of the binary options for eternal destiny. And that's one of the big problems in the church, is people don't understand what any of the New Testament really has to do with life here on earth. People get so caught up in it, and it's wonderful, people who are concerned, even people whose gifting is evangelism, and it's all about bringing people into saving relationship with Jesus. But it's not just getting your boarding pass and then just sitting and waiting for your flight to be called.

But that's the way a lot of believers live because they don't know what to do. And they may actually genuinely want to do things about the things in their life that are not pleasing to God, but they can't seem to do anything about it. And it's because they don't understand that it's a three-part process. It's a three-dimensional process.

And the natural thing is just to try to do what I'm told to do, and I find I can't. It's not that I can't ever do it, but I can't do it consistently. I can't keep it up for a long period.

People start thinking, maybe other people can do it, but I can't. Or maybe this is all just talking about what happens when we get to heaven. Or maybe God doesn't really keep these promises. Maybe these are people's ideas and not really from God.

The news is what we're going into now. The Lord has made radical change in us, and now we can start moving forward in concert with Him.

The unfortunate thing on the broad scale, on the universal scale for the church, is how little this is understood. But the benefit to those who do come to understand it and act on it and arrange their lives accordingly, and on the lives of people that they get to influence and help to understand this, is immense.

Where Paul goes, to answer the question of why not just coast? Why go through the effort and the warfare that it requires to change in practice and to exchange the habits of the flesh for new life by the Spirit?

And his entire argument actually revolves around our identity, who we now are. How shall we who died to sin still live in it?

And we'll do a couple of verses at a time here, starting in Romans 6, verse 3. **"Or do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus have been baptized into His death? Therefore, we have been buried with Him through baptism into death, so that as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life."**

He starts with this image of baptism. We usually think of today as a ceremony that you do when you profess faith in Jesus, or in some churches, you have the sprinkling as an infant.

But what is baptism really about? Baptism is really about identification. In the Greek usage of the term, you talk about baptism in other scenarios, such as a ship being baptized into a harbor.

When the ship sinks, what happened in the baptism? Well, the ship now became part of the harbor, and you no longer see the ship, and it's down there somewhere. But it's now one with what it was baptized into.

We are now being joined in baptism into Christ Jesus and baptized into His death. It's a statement of our identity at this point, who we are now. We are joined to Jesus, and the sin that we used to live for has also been put to death because we've been baptized into His death.

And then the hope of it is, it's not just our sin being baptized into the likeness of His death, but the hope then that just as Jesus was raised through the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life. There's this wonderful hope and vision of where we're going because of who we are.

It's also, these are all past tense. We have been baptized into Christ Jesus. We have been baptized into His death. We have been buried with Him. These are all past tense. As we gave our life to the Lord, these are all true of us.

And how often are we aware and thanking the Lord for these things? And when we're going throughout our day, or even right after one of those "again" type issues and you blew it again, how often are we aware that that's no longer who we are and that we have the hope of walking in newness of life?

And the first element of this is your identity. You've been identified with, baptized into, Christ Jesus. And the emphasis here is on the depth. We will look at three aspects of this situation, but this is: I am no longer who I was.

What makes that difficult to grasp is, for the most part, I'm not acting any differently, and that confuses people. And physically, I'm the same. We tend to focus on the physical. Nothing's changed physically, so is this all metaphorical or what? There's this abstract philosophy, abstract theology, but the significance of dying is final. The one who has died is no longer active. And I am not who I was anymore.

But there's more to the picture, and we have to learn how to live with the new. Continue, yeah, the next section, Romans 6:5: **"For if we have become planted with Him in the likeness of His death, certainly we shall also be in the likeness of His resurrection, knowing this, that our old man was crucified with Him in order that our body of sin, or our embodiment of sin, might be made powerless so that we would no longer be slaves to sin. For he who has died is freed from sin."**

In this section, we have two new pictures. We have the picture of being planted with Jesus in the likeness of His death, and we also have the picture of crucifixion. And starting with planted, it's really neat because in the previous section we are buried with Him through baptism into death, and here we're planted with Him in the likeness of His death. And there's a bit of a transition, and the question is compare and contrast. What's similar across the two examples is the thing that's buried and the thing that's planted both need to go into the soil, and both disappear.

Buried things, whether after someone passes away or a pet or whatever it is, after they're buried, they decay and they're not going to come back. The life is gone. However, the thing that's planted, you're planting with the hope of the life springing up out of the ground into something new. And that's really key.

And if we think about it where we have experienced this, I was just thinking as we were talking about this just now, two of my grandparents are buried just a few miles from where we live now. And I can go to their graves, and it's just the same as decades ago when they died and were buried. Actually, right here, various spots around our house, three of our four dogs are buried. And we have no expectation of ever seeing them again, and we won't. They continue as a memory, a wonderful memory, distinct memories, but it's final.

But when you plant something, you plant it with the expectation of new life coming forth. What you bury in planting doesn't deteriorate and just become part of the soil. It changes, and it begins to produce a new life, which after some time starts to become slightly visible and then more visible. And it grows, and eventually then produces more seed. But there is a new life.

And there's a fun thing here, too, with this thing about being planted together, because the term was used with a second meaning, meaning to grow up together with someone. Your boyhood pal, your best girlfriend in elementary school, high school, whatever, and your life is affected by that relationship. And so we're planted with Jesus, that as Jesus was raised from the dead, as Jesus was still there, but it's a different life. It's a life of resurrection. It's not the natural life. In both cases with Jesus, perfectly sinless.

But the resurrected Jesus actually demonstrated some things that the disciples did not see during the incarnation. And it's not that He had the power to walk through walls. It's easy to conclude that. No, He was trying to get them used to the idea that when He said, "I'm with you always," He really meant it. But I'm not with you always in a physical manifestation that you can see and touch and speak to and be spoken to audibly with physical speech. But we are planted with Jesus to grow up with Him, to be like Him, because of the influence as we grow together. He is very much a part of our new life that comes out of our being planted with Him.

The other thing about planted is when you plant a seed, the new life, it's a progressive development, right? You don't plant something and then a 10-foot tree appears or emerges a week after. You see it gradually growing and gradually maturing and bearing fruit in its first season, and then more in its next season, and so forth.

But the beauty of plants is it's grown bit by bit, and you rejoice in the growth. Yep. And that's what we get to do in our lives, rejoice in the growth, what we get to do with one another as we see that new life growing and get to rejoice in it. I'm rejoicing in all the new spring life around us as we get, it's bit by bit. It's not all of a sudden, and grace while we grow this paper.

The second image in this section is one of the old man, not meaning old like aged, but old meaning former. The former man was crucified with Him in order that our embodiment of sin might be made powerless. There's this picture of crucified. And the question is, and Steve pointed this out a couple years ago, and it's stuck with me ever since, the question is, what can a crucified person do?

A crucified person, as they're getting crucified, is beat down, severely hurt and weakened, and is nailed to the cross, and at that point is just struggling to breathe and is humiliated and ashamed. And it's a slow death. It's gradually being reduced to inactivity. It's being gradually made powerless. But the one thing it can still do is talk. It can still protest the fact of its being crucified. And that is true of our old man.

But it can do something else. The two thieves who were crucified with Jesus, one of them was hurling abuse at Jesus just like a lot of people in the crowd were doing, but the other one was able to repent. He was able to say, "You and I are getting what we deserve, but this man is innocent. And they ask, Jesus, remember me. Jesus said, "Truly I say to you, today you'll be with me in Paris.

That is one of the activities we carry on as the flesh is being crucified. It's recognized that we're the problem that is necessitating the agonizing death to, and here, with the process of sanctification, of developing a new life, we are responsible for what it is that's still part of our lifestyle that's got to go. And that's one thing we do as we are crucifying the flesh.

Part of it is we have to decide that this aspect of the flesh needs to be crucified. It's not that all of the flesh, all of the natural and naturally sinful person is being crucified. We are instructed to crucify the flesh. We have to choose this particular thing, this particular aspect, this particular behavior, attitude, whatever it is, it needs to go. And crucify the flesh with its passions and desires, and like Jesus, we have to choose to accept the calling to the cross. Nobody is forcing us to put to death any aspect of the sinful lifestyle practices. It's when we recognize that God is calling us to do that, maybe with the help of some other people who have noticed that there's something that isn't quite the way it should be, that we didn't notice without that help.

In fact, I think I never thought of the reality of there was a skit that we used to do at Boy Scouts that you got the people riding on the trolley and somebody kind of sniffing and gets off the bus. And this happens in various people. And so there's just two and one guy. Hey, did you take a bath today? Yeah. Did you change your clothes? Yeah. Did you change your socks? Yeah. Well, how can I still think? Well, yeah, I did change my socks. Here are the old ones.

So you've been baptized, you've been washed, but you're still carrying around the dirty socks, in fact kind of like a treasure.

In this verse 6, the old man was crucified with Him. And it's by the Spirit, and as we join the Lord, we agree that those elements of our flesh need to be made powerless, need to be crucified. But in the meantime, we often find that the flesh is still crying out and calling to us and still barking orders at us from the cross, saying, "Do this, do that. But what ability does it actually have to impact our life? It's already made powerless.

And there was just such a wonderful note of freedom here, that I don't have to listen to the voice of sin or sin in the flesh anymore. I'm free to disregard and to not be a slave to sin because the one who's died is freed from sin. I'm totally free to disregard the protests of the flesh in my life. It's not who I am anymore.

I've heard many times, and I think we've all felt at times, in order to be authentic to myself, whatever thoughts or voices or inclinations that I have from within should be expressed because that's authentic. And what Paul is saying in Romans here is no way. Who are we now? We're the new from the Spirit, with the life of God poured in. And that's who we are. That's what's going to last. That's who we're taking with us when we meet the Lord face to face. And that's who we really are.

And there is a familiar but old element of our life, which is the flesh, that in reality is being crucified. We don't have to be under its command anymore, being crucified as we choose to crucify. And verse 6 says that it might be rendered powerless. A more literal translation of it might be reduced to inactivity. It is a process, just as crucifixion is a long, slow, agonizing death. The reducing aspects of our sinful lifestyle to inactivity is a process. And in fact, it's the process we're talking about these half a dozen weeks.

Part of what he's saying here is know who you are now. We're not trying to become who you're not. It's easy to feel like, I guess I'm just hardwired. I'm just an angry person. I'm just a fearful person. I'm just an anxious person. I can't help it if I'm selfish. I was an only child. I can't help it if I have a temper. I have red hair, in quotes from Steve's grandmother. Those are both quotes from one of my grandmothers, who was a wonderful person. But we all have our little things. It's easy to feel hardwired. But the good news of this is saying, no, we're not trying to become who we're not. Each of us radically changed now through what Jesus has done, and our character is now from Him. And so now we are growing to be in practice who we have now become in essence.

And I remember, I used this example last night, but a grad student who came very afraid because she had, as many students do, gotten deeply involved with pornography. She knew it was going to be a long road to marriage. She was going for upper education. It would be years. She figured it was a safe way to take care of her sexual desires. After all, she wasn't sleeping with somebody. It was her way of dealing with that part of her life. With her PhD research, she had times where she had to sit alone in the lab, waiting for hours to do the next thing that had to be done on schedule with some experiments, and nobody else around.

This is the story of many, not just grad students, especially as readily available as it is now online. But she became terrified because she began to hear voices, and this is a believer, commanding her to go there, and she couldn't not go there. She just felt powerless. That voice was commanding her, and she would waste entire weekends, not getting any sleep. She said, the ridiculous thing is there were a lot of cheap romance stories. I know all of them. They're really stupid, but I keep going there, and I'm hearing these voices.

She was scared enough that she came for help. Part of what we went through was this passage. It was such a relief to her to see, I am not the old. I do not have to respond to that commanding voice that I am used to and feeling like I have no choice. I do now that, oh, I am. I've been crucified with Christ. That former self, it's still there, but it does not need to command me, that I can reign in life over this through Christ.

She began to take those steps of growth, and it snowballed. As we'll be getting into later, she was taking the three steps that really got at why this has become such a grab on her life and disabling those. That's what we're getting into now. But she came completely clear and is doing well. She's had plenty of pressure that normally would have sent people back, but she has not. She's given hope to many others as well.

We've seen this in many people in many areas of life, experienced it ourselves in many areas of life. But know who you are. The encouragement to each of us after tonight is to go back through these passages and personalize it. Thank the Lord that this is true of you and really make it your own and the basis from which you grow. Also thank the Lord that it's true of other believers. This is a gift that we get to give others around us who are seeking to grow in the Lord.

It's warfare, and it's not easy. Anyone who's tried to grow knows that there's a lot of opposition, and it's not automatic. It takes progressive trust, progressive growth, and continually coming to the Lord and making progress bit by bit.

There was one church elder who really stood out to me. And I have relations with a number of elders. But this one man, who I found out struggled even though he was a church elder, didn't think he had any spiritual gifts. He did. He finally found out what it was, and he'd always heard it as the gift of exhortation. When he found it can also be translated as the gift of encouragement, he said, "Oh, that's my gift. It really was. When I'd be struggling along in the early years of the ministry and talk to him about what was going on, in contrast to everybody else, he always saw the Lord in me and what the Lord was doing in me. And if I was struggling with something, he didn't try to deny it, but he would quietly balance out the picture so that my attention wasn't just on where I was tripping up, but I saw the bigger picture, and I saw the positive picture of what the Lord is doing.

And basically, he saw me under grace, and he saw the hope, exultant hope, of the glory of God, that I'm growing to display the wonder of who God is more and more. And I'll never run out of opportunities to grow more in that. But everybody else, and these were responsible men, had the tendency to be trying to look for what's wrong so that we can fix it.

And with that, the gift that we receive from the Lord and get to grow in ourselves as we welcome it, that's true. And the gift that we get to give to others, just a quick recap, it starts with recognizing that we are indeed dead to who we were. We are no longer who we were. The old me, the old Alan, is gone. And then in verses five through seven, that I've been planted with Jesus. And so that progressive growth of that new little sprout coming out and developing new life, I can count on the Lord working that out in my life. I can count on the Lord working that out in the lives of believers around me, as well as the embodiment of sin being crucified with Jesus and being reduced to inactivity, being made powerless. I can count on that dynamic as well because of who I now am in Jesus. As I respond to Him on that basis, the activity of sin is gradually being reduced to inactivity, not having an impact on my actions, on my thoughts, to nearly the degree that it used to. And it's progressive growth out of it. And then the third element, which we're in now in verse eight, is really about the life that we live, right? We're not who we once were, we don't have to respond to sin anymore, and now we get to live. To God, we get to live to Jesus.

Starting in verse 8 now: **"If we've died with Christ, we believe that we should also live with Him, knowing that Christ, having been raised from the dead, is never to die again. Death no longer is master over Him. For the death that He died, He died to sin once for all, but the life that He lives, He lives to God."**

This is such a wonderful text because, as we're looking at the reality of who we now are, we see that sin is made powerless, and then in this section, death is defeated. Jesus, having died, is never to die again. And having been raised from the dead, He is never to die again. Death no longer is master over Him. And that's the inheritance that He's given to us.

It's not a cycle. There are some religions who see it as a cycle of you're born and you go through life and then you die and then you're born again and go through another life and so on. It's not a cycle. This is a once and for all. So the trajectory of our life is to be fully alive to the Lord, to be responsive to Him.

Last night we talked about what does it mean to be dead, and often in Scripture, death and life, if the context is working on the physical level, yes, it can mean physical life or physical death, but often its concern is the spiritual level, spiritual life and spiritual death. In the most basic sense, being dead is just being not responsive, right? You're not there, you're not responding, and being alive is being able to respond.

For us, the trajectory of our life and where it's heading is to be in the fullness of that relationship with the Lord, fully alive and responsive to Him, joining Him. It's such a wonderful promise.

And if we now compare with these three elements, with where we were when we started with the question, should we just coast and hang out in the flesh? Well, if we have any understanding of who we now are, the real question is why would you do that? What are you doing under the circumstances? What are you gaining continuing in what you've decided isn't life?

What do we do with this wonderful truth of who we now are? Verse 11: **"Even so, recognize yourselves accordingly to be dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus."**

This is all true. Welcome it. Recognize that this is true. I'm not who I used to be, and I am now alive to You, Lord, and responsive to You, and following in the footsteps of Jesus.

One thing here, it really reminds me of the benefit of our having acquired two more grandchildren at once a year and a half ago, to watch them. They don't have any question about their hope of developing as normal human beings. They recognize that they're like parents, like the adults, and they are just determined to learn to do everything they see the parents doing that they're interested in. They're not necessarily interested in absolutely everything the parents are doing, but they don't have any question. You walk, I will walk. You talk, I'll talk.

And as often an older child and the firstborn will say, you know, "When is the baby going to start talking?" And sometimes parents say, "Very soon." And the next question you're going to be asking is, "When is the baby going to stop talking?" But no question, there is the sense of identification. They don't look at the differences and say, "Oh, I can't because I'm not as big as they are," or whatever. They just look at the similarities, and they say, "If you can, I can, and I will."

And because of that, watching a little child working at something which is the pin in the balloon of designing childproof packages, good luck. You can be as ingenious as you want in working out what it takes to open that pill bottle, but the child who sees that pill bottle and wants to open it has things going for it that will defeat the most sophisticated engineering. They are motivated by the occasional, the rare success, because learning to walk, I mean, how many thousands or ten thousands of attempts before the first real step actually happens and the child realizes, "I took a step"?

In fact, it's not unusual with that first step for the child to get so excited about having taken a step that they completely lose track of what they're doing, and they fall down immediately. But that does not discourage them. They don't say, "I knew it. I took a step, but here I am back on the floor." Uh-uh. It's, "I took a step. I took a step. I'm going to take another step." And often within minutes or hours of the first step, there's the series of three or four steps, and okay, watch out, world.

**"Consider yourself, recognize yourself, to be dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus"**. That radical transformation from my being attuned to everything that leaves or more actively shuts God out of the picture to becoming attuned to God. And if we really focus on that and take advantage of the opportunities to learn how to live that out in practice, and to recognize yourself dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus, it's recognizing and choosing the basis from which I live, right? Being alive to the Lord and not responding to sin.

But there's also a wonderful note of encouragement here, as when I recognize myself to be dead to sin, it means I'm free to not have to give in to discouragement, right? I think it's often, I've seen many, and I've experienced myself in this area, wow, again. And all the focus goes towards the mounting evidence that I can only blow this, and I can't seem to improve things. You always, you never, you'll never change, the voice of the accuser. And the freedom here is that I don't have to give in to that voice, because I recognize myself because of all that. And I've got the habit, just a reflex, of responding to it. But I don't have to.

Recognize yourself according to be dead to sin and alive to God. I don't have to. It's not that I don't hear that voice. It's not that that voice isn't familiar. It's not that I don't have a habit of responding to that voice without even thinking about it. But I don't have to. I no longer have to. It is no longer a part of my true nature to respond to that voice. And now I've got the freedom to move on. I've got the freedom to change, and it's a process. It's a process! I don't have to listen to it, but I'm used to just responding to it on a reflex that there's going to be a lot more of that while I'm learning to tune it out rather than respond automatically.

I have to bring in a verse which is not part of this passage, but Steve was talking about the twins who see the adults and say, I'm going to be like you. I'm one of you. I will grow up to be like you. And that's where our focus can be.

Second Corinthians 3:17 and 18, **"Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But we all, with unveiled face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from glory to glory, just as from the Lord, the Spirit."**

But we're planted, and we get to grow as we look at the one we're growing up to be like and with. That's been where do I focus: on myself and on the oh no, I did it again, or do I focus on the one that I'm growing up to be like, and His image, and growing into it, rather than giving in to the lie that I'll never? Because I will grow.

And in verse 11 we have the first imperative, which is to recognize ourself dead to sin, and here we'll actually get, boom, boom, boom, three imperatives in a row. The second one is a do not: "Do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its lusts. We talked last week, and for many weeks, about lust being compulsions, and if I may paraphrase, I might say, don't let the master of sin reign in your mortal body so that you do what it tells you to. And this ties directly to that earlier section about knowing that our old man was crucified with Him.

I don't have to listen to that voice anymore as it's protesting the new life that's being developed in me and, naturally, the old being reduced in activity. I don't have to listen to it anymore. I don't have to obey what it is trying to compel me to do, what sin is trying to compel me to do.

But instead, verse 13, **"And do not go on presenting the members of your body to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but instead present yourselves to God as those alive from the dead, and your members as weapons of righteousness to God. For sin shall not be master over you, for you're not under law, but under grace."**

And there we have step one, which we will come back to and talk about how actually to do that in practice, and considering specific examples, including very common ones and maybe a more spectacular one or two. This first step is breaking free from the compulsion.

We've done the background analysis from Romans 1. We've seen why this step, as well as the two others that were introduced, the knees with the downward spiral, why each of them is necessary. Why it has to be three steps up corresponding to the three steps down. And then this section we looked at is what motivates us actually to take this step, and why does taking this step matter?  What's the significance of it? What enables us to take this step? It's that my former identity, it was buried, it's gone, never to be seen again. I've been planted with Jesus, to rise to new life in practice as Jesus did is something for me to expect. That's another aspect of the hope, the glory of God.

And then the permanence, that this is once and for all. Working it out in practice is not just once and for all, but that this is not something that's going to have to be repeated over and over. The death that Jesus died, He died once for all.

And this process, even though it's a process, working it out, every bit of what we do work out is permanent progress. But we'll get into what that looks like in practice next week.

I think just one other note with that question of, does it matter? Here in this last section, he's saying that, in practice, it really matters. I'm either making my members, including my mouth as well as my actions, a weapon of unrighteousness or a weapon of righteousness. What I do with my words and my actions is really a weapon in either the Lord's or the adversary's hands.

And James certainly recognizes that in James, about the tongue, about the tongue being a restless evil full of deadly poison that can set on fire. We have a friend who actually, whoa, I realized I get up on Sunday morning, we're getting set to go to church, and I realized that words are going to come out of my mouth, and especially as we got to get the kids going and we got to get there and find the shoes, and that my mouth is a weapon that can be used either for the Lord or against. And it really does matter what comes out of my mouth, not just what we get done so that we get breakfast and we get everybody dressed and in and out of the bathroom and into the car and so forth, but the effect on the several human lives that make up this family is important.

Next week, we'll be getting into that step one. How do I get at that invisible part that seems to drive what I say and what I do? But here, taking time to thank the Lord that He has made a radical change in who I am, so I'm not trying to become who I'm not. I'm getting to grow into who I now am and get to bring that to the people around us and get planted and growing, bit by bit.

And also, just encouragement to, yeah, as Erica said, spend time in prayer, thanking the Lord and welcoming it as true of me and of believers around me through this passage. And as we get to step one, it's simple to state: it's exchanging my former objective, which was sinful, that was not reaching the target of glorifying God, for what He tells me is really life instead and trusting Him for it. But often that feels like the foundations that I've been relying on are getting taken out from under me, and the question is, can I trust You, Lord, to do that?

And this section that we just looked at is such a strong encouragement to say yes, we really can, because of who the Lord has made us to be and changed us at the heart, and has made sin powerless. We don't have to listen to it and has defeated death. We're not going to have to die repeatedly, but as we grow, we're living more life progressively.

And what's helped me as well with this is it's really exciting because we're getting to discover who we are, who the Lord has made us to be. And we all have a sense of that as we come to Him, and this process reveals to us piece by piece, in practice, who it really is that the Lord has made us to be. And I think that's a wonderful motivation and a wonderful opportunity that we all get with step one here.

> Lord Jesus, we're thankful for all that You have done and all that You've purchased for us by Your death, by Your resurrection. Lord, we thank You that we are not who we once were because of the gift of Your Spirit, that we've been born again. The old has passed away and the new has come. Lord, we thank You that You've made sin powerless, that we don't have to listen to the old voices that used to govern our lives, used to control us. But Lord, we get to listen to Your voice.

> Lord, we ask to be steeped in Your word, that we would become more and more familiar with Your voice, as well as interacting with You more and more in prayer, that as You, the shepherd, call, that we would be right there immediately, going in concert with You. Lord, thank You for the abundant life that You've made available to us, that we get to live to You and be truly alive and live in the fulfillment of walking with You, our infinite God, our loving God, instead of for finite self and just trying to build our own little kingdoms and think that it's amazing.

> Lord, thank You that You call us to much more. Lord, thank You for the staggering glory of who You've made us to be. Lord, thank You that You don't just zap us, but You give us the dignity of, and the joy, just the total joy, of getting to discover who we are with You and growing in You piece by piece, just getting a fuller picture.

> Lord, thank you that You prepared the best gifts. Lord, that You didn't just dump it all in our lap at once, but You're preparing us bit by bit to be delighted in seeing You in full, as we've been getting to know You more and more in this life. Lord, we ask that You'd continue to speak to us through this text, that You'd be encouraging us, that You'd use it as a basis for prayer, both for ourselves, welcoming in our lives, as well as for others, that You would work by Your Spirit from the inside to make these truths come alive in the lives of others as well.

> Lord, we're thankful, and we're thankful that You pray for us as well, and that we have much hope and encouragement that You who promised are faithful, and You will bring it to pass.

> Lord, we ask that we would take courage to trust You with this, step by step.

> We pray this all in Your name. Amen.