Let's start in, let's read through Joshua 1. We can go around the block a verse or two at a time. Joshua 1:1-9. This passage is very dear to me because it is my calling passage. I couldn't guess how many thousand times I've pulled up this passage and spent time in it. I'm constantly seeing new things. Doesn't matter what text it is. We're constantly seeing new things, deeper insights.

Joshua 1:1-2
> "Now it came about after the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, that the Lord spoke to Joshua, the son of Nun, Moses' servant, saying, Moses, my servant, is dead. Now therefore arise, cross this Jordan, you and all this people, to the land which I am giving to them, to the sons of Israel."

> "Every place on which the sole of your foot steps I have given to you, just as I spoke to Moses. From the wilderness and this Lebanon even as far as the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and as far as the great sea towards the setting of the sun will be your territory."

> "No man will be able to stand before you all the days of your life. Just as I have been with Moses, I will be with you. I will not fail you, nor forsake you. Be strong and courageous, for you shall cause this people to inherit the land which I swore to their fathers to give them."

> "Only be strong and very courageous, being careful to do according to all the law that Moses my servant commanded you. Do not turn from it to the right hand or to the left, that you may have good success. Wherever you go, this book of the law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate on it day and night so that you may be careful to do according to all that is written in it. For then you will make your way prosperous and then you will have good success."

> "Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous. Do not be frightened and do not be dismayed, for the Lord your God is with you wherever you go."

What we want to do tonight is unpack all these references. We're going to take the next several weeks on Joshua 1, Hebrews 3, which is pointing out the significance for believers in Jesus of this passage—why it is that it applies under the new covenant and not just under the old.

We also will look at Psalm 95, which is also in Hebrews 3. The first thing we want to do is be sure we understand the historical and geographical, geopolitical context of what Joshua 1 is recounting.

This will leave a few loose ends that we'll pick up as we take up the other passages and pull us all together. These three passages together—Joshua 1, Hebrews 3-4, and Psalm 95—really are a unit, but it's Hebrews 3 that connects with this, quotes it, and explains it. And Psalm 95, understanding how this applies to believers in Jesus, indwelt by the Holy Spirit, is key, is foundational to anyone seeking to counsel others regarding whatever issue of life from the Bible. We really want to understand it.

We will look at different aspects of it from different perspectives over the next couple of weeks. In fact, we constantly are either teaching directly from this passage or teaching the same principles to people that we are counseling.

This is especially important at a particular juncture in a believer's life—what Erica and I years ago referred to as the lordship crisis. It is that. There are various other ways we could describe it. But it's the point after which people have gotten established in enjoying the benefits of having come into a relationship with the Lord.

Now it is time to get moving and enter into active, cooperative relationship with the Lord. That includes not just enjoying God's protection, God's provisions, God's leading, guidance, but now it is time to start obeying His instructions for our role in our cooperative relationship with Him as His allies by the Spirit.

In many believers' lives, this is a major crisis point because it comes at the point that they are starting to try to obey God and they hit the brick wall. They find that having asked Jesus into their lives and genuinely meant it, and so they are His, and now being in relationship with Him, needing to move that relationship the next step, which is ruling.

If you recall, Genesis 1, the Lord's purpose in making us, to create us in His image—and we have talked about that recently with you—to be living representations of Him designed to display the nature of the true God Himself, the life giver, and commissioned to rule, to rule over the realm of living beings, starting with the animals and then moving to relating to other human beings.

That is the first aspect of rule. That is what is worked out with Israel. Now we come to entering into the land that God has promised, the territory that He has promised. With Israel, that is a physical geopolitical territory. For them to rule in that context, to serve and rule, we have noted, corresponds to our current concept of managing. It involves responsibility. It involves authority.

Now we move to ruling in the domain of our own lives. This is the Lord calling Joshua to lead the people into the land that He has promised them, and which they have waited centuries to take up. He has brought them out of Egypt. He has sustained them 40 years in the wilderness and brought them out of slavery. He is taking them in to being not slaves, but rulers, responsible managers. And I'm already going beyond what we discussed with the students last night. There is so much in here that we have varying degrees of familiarity with and that we understand to varying degrees. All of this applies, not in exactly the same way as it did in Israel, but all of this applies to our life with the Lord as New Testament believers, as new creatures in Christ.

Starting with asking the obvious, this came about after the death of Moses. Who's Moses? It is really important as we read Scripture to be asking this kind of question. We run over so much familiar stuff, and we do have familiarity. We know some things about it. But there's much more a lot of times. It really helps in unpacking a passage to ask, who is everybody?

Moses is God's chosen leader. What did he lead? Whom did he lead? And what did he lead? Well, he was educated. He was educated in the culture that he grew up in. He almost certainly was a graduate of the University of Alexandria. There were universities back at that time. The Egyptian culture.

What else about his background? He lived between both the Hebrews and the Egyptians. He understands both.

How does he understand the Egyptians? Because he grew up in Pharaoh's palace as an adopted son, of Pharaoh's daughter.

As such, what other training did he receive? We're not told explicitly, but it certainly is true. He would have observed the princes and the pharaoh ruling.

Sons of Pharaoh were trained in what? They were highly educated. Presumably in warfare? Yes. Moses would have been trained as an Egyptian general.

Taking on the leadership, we're not told how many people there were overall because they didn't count population the way we do. They basically counted it by households. They didn't do it the hard way.

You may have heard the story about the guys riding on the Transcontinental Railroad through the plains and the huge buffalo herds. One passenger said to the other,

"How many buffalo do you think are in that herd?" He said, "You know, 16,234."

"What? How could you count all those?"

"Oh, it's easy. I count feet and divide by four." Okay.

Massive, innumerable crowds.

We got on that little rabbit trail because we don't know for sure how many people because they counted households. They counted how many heads of households were there. But we can figure from that, according to what a household would typically be, about three million people.

Three million Hebrews or Egyptians?

The Hebrews, when they left Egypt. There would have been about three million of them.

He needed to know how to lead a massive group of people, including how to organize them to move out. Where is that? Where are we told that was part of what took place?

Numbers, right? It's part of what they did in the wilderness. Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers all describe the departure from Egypt and the organization of the people.

We studied the book of Numbers last year at the Women's Bible Study at PBCC.
Everybody was like, "What? We're going to study Numbers?" But I want to tell you, that was rich.

Isn't that amazing? That is one awesome book.

One question I had, Steve, as you were describing Moses' background: He had to run away and go for 40 years or whatever in the desert. That must have been interesting for him as his son raised in the Egyptian palace to have to go out and work. And that's part of his training for herding all these people.

Yes, he was herding sheep.

So he had to survive somehow.

The Lord led him to Jethro.

What can I do to make myself useful and be contributing and not just drawing on your hospitality?

So, herd sheep.

That was the most demeaning, practically the most demeaning work that you could do.

Extremely humbling.

As being brought up as a prince in Egypt, what kind of response did he expect from those he tried to direct?

I assume he would have expected—I was going to use the word compliance.

That's not really what I mean, but—

Oh, that is part of it.

Yes.

A willingness to follow.

Respect, cooperation, compliance, willingness to follow.

Now compare that with herding sheep in the wilderness.

How much respect?

You've got to earn it.

A bunch of them are really tough about learning it.

It was standard.

We see the depictions of the shepherd carrying the little lamb.

You know what that's about?

Almost certainly, that lamb was one that just kept straying, straying, straying, and the shepherd could not keep that lamb with the flock and finally had to take the drastic move of deliberately, with his hands, breaking one of the lamb's legs.

Then the lamb can't stray and needs care and needs help.

The shepherd picks up the lamb, puts it on her shoulders, and carries it while the leg is healing.

The lamb learns to appreciate the shepherd and is not inclined to go running off once it can walk freely again.

Moses is trained in exalted context and very humbling context.

He's going to need both of those to lead God's people.

Especially when we think about what we know about God's people when they were taken out of Egypt.

After 430 years in Egypt, they had assimilated a lot of the ways of the Egyptians, much of which was not pleasing to the Lord.

Okay, so let's go on.

> "Spoke to Joshua, son of Nun."

We've got that much.

What else do we know about Joshua?

He was Moses' servant.

Yes. How did that come about? I don't remember. It's an obscure notice that Joshua had been Moses' helper from the time he was a young man, bahur (בָּחוּר), a young man starting to emerge into young adulthood.

What do we know about the relationship with Joshua and Moses? How it developed? What it looked like during Moses' lifetime?

Well, we know that Joshua and Caleb were the two spies that saw things with different eyes from the others.

And what did they do that the others didn't?

They saw what God could do, not what problems were there.

They saw what God promised, that it's a land, a very fruitful land flowing with milk and honey. And it was. It took two men to carry a single cluster of Valley of Eshkol grapes using a pole.

I've never seen a cluster of grapes like that. The other spies said, "Oh yeah, it's great."

But what else did they say?

The other spies said there were giants.

"Yeah, but the people in the land, they're giants. They're all giants."

Some of them were gigantic size, but most of them were not. They're giants in the land. It's a land that devours its people.

"We're not going."

"Heck no, we won't go."

And they didn't.

Joshua and Caleb.

Who's Caleb? Didn't get mentioned here, but who is Caleb? What tribe did he represent?

Ephraim, one of the two tribes, the sons of Joseph.

Ephraim means fruitful.

And what does his name imply? What did the name Caleb mean? What did the word Caleb mean?

Dog.

How did they regard dogs at that time?

They were like dump rats. They did not have a high view of dogs.

They called non-Israelites dogs at times. It was an insult.

Somehow this man in Ephraim, so maybe he was originally a Canaanite who was assimilated into Ephraim because you did not have to be born into Israel to become part of Israel.

Converts are welcome. When they came out of Egypt there was the mixed multitude that went with them who were not of Israelite origin but Egyptians who after watching the Lord's dealings with Pharaoh and with Israel and rescue said, "Can we go with you? We want to go where your God is taking you. We want your God to be our God."

How Caleb got the name and whether Caleb was born into Ephraim or assimilated into it, we don't know.

Joshua and Caleb.

Now, rise, cross this Jordan.

What's the Jordan?

A river.

It's a river you would have to cross to get into Canaan.

It starts up in the snows of Lebanon.

It's like our rivers in California that come from the Sierra, from the snowpack in the Sierra.

What does the name Jordan mean?

Means descending.

It starts from the snowpack that God has provided.

Where does it end?

In the Dead Sea.

Now, so it's descending into the Dead Sea. Where there's no outlet, the water evaporates, leaving all the salts in it. The Dead Sea is also known as the Salt Sea. Erica and I have gone swimming—I really should say floating. You have no choice. The salinity is that high. If you get out and just let the sun dry you out, you will have salt crystals. Tiny, but you'll have a coating of salt on you.

It is also very below sea level. It is the lowest place on the face of the Earth. Interestingly enough, the Jordan flows along the Great Rift Valley. I believe that is the longest valley on the face of the earth. It extends from Northern Africa into the land of Canaan.

How do you get a rift like that? Earthquake. When there are earth quakes, when there's a major shift between two tectonic plates, part of what happens is where you've got irregular lines, the line is the same where you've got the fault line, but then when they shift, because that line is not just a straight line, when they shift it'll mean in some places to places that stick out if you were to draw the average line straight line.

Down that line, you've got parts of this plate that are on—most of it is on this side—but there are projections over the other. When they shift to places that stick out, so to speak, beyond that median line, which is really just imaginary, things are piling up. So you get big uplifts.

If you were currently or were here at Stanford and especially if you took any geology at Stanford, you were taken out to Half Moon Bay area where you could see the contours of places where there were uplifts and down. Part of what happens is the opposite of these uplifts is you get sinkholes. There are some sinkholes up here because of the San Andreas Fault. There are some sinkholes you can go up and see in the hills just right next to Stanford.

The Great Rift Valley would have been a giant sinkhole.

What else in biblical history involved a sinkhole? The sons of Korah got swallowed up in Numbers. The sons of Korah, Kohath and Merari, decided to defy the Lord. And so God told everybody else to clear out away from them. Moses said, "If something happens that has never been known before and the earth opens up and swallows them, their tents and all their stuff, then I, not they, am the Lord's representative." And sure enough.

Jordan, it wasn't Korah and all his people that were following him but not necessarily all his sons, because there are several psalms that are written by the sons of Korah. We learned that when we studied Numbers. Have to look and see if that's the same Korah.
Yeah, that's a good thought. Well, the sons of Korah, remember, that's in David's time. So that's centuries later. But it could be. I never thought about there being a different Korah that they would be the sons of. Various biblical names show up several times in biblical history. But I'm really glad you brought that up.

That is a principle of the Lord's working. When He deals with a group of people as a group, there is always a back sort.

When He judged Jericho, Rahab was the last person you'd think would be rescued.

When the Lord judges, individuals have a chance to opt out of the group. That's the same thing with people who are children.

Where do we see that in Jesus' circle? Who opted out?

Judas.

Judas was there participating. And it's very interesting. You would think Judas would have been obvious. But you remember at the Last Supper, when Jesus said, "One of you will betray me." What happened next?

Everyone asks, "Who, is it me?"

"Not me, I hope."

Nobody knew who it was. When Judas went out, they thought Jesus had just sent him to get something they needed for the peace.

Actually, there is a produce, very high scale produce, and they've got absolutely everything placed in the Stanford Shopping Center. You'll see waiters, people from the restaurants around them come rushing in because they've just run out of horseradish or whatever it is.

People thought that's what Judas was doing. So Judas blended in so well among the disciples that only Jesus knew who it was.

There is always the opt-out.

All right. Now, when they crossed the Jordan, what was the condition?

It was a flood tide.

You visit the Jordan now. A student told us last night that they actually went kayaking in the Jordan. The portions of the Jordan that we saw certainly didn't seem like it was that big, but we're seeing it after the development of a massive amount of irrigation of that area by pulling water out of the Jordan.

It's kind of like the Colorado River, which was a massive raging river, but they've had to put controls on people for taking water out of the Colorado where there wouldn't be any river.

The Jordan was a formidable barrier.

When they went across, what did the Lord do?

Similar to the parting of the Red Sea, He caused the Jordan to stop flowing.

Where did it stop flowing?

The revelation is everywhere. Where's the locale where it stopped flowing?

Place called Adam.

He probably used an earthquake because at Adam there are large cliffs and there are occasional earthquakes and occasional landslides. He just needs a big landslide to go down and form a temporary cofferdam so that people can go through.

You say, well, we got a natural explanation for it.
But the timing: right when the priests had to carry the ark, which was the symbol of the Lord's presence. And what were the instructions? How were they to lead the people across?

They are to be 1,000 yards in front of them, 2,000 cubits.

That's significant.

That's about five-eighths of a mile, a little over a kilometer.

Yeah, basically a kilometer, or a little over.

And of course, that's necessary for anybody to be able to see which way we're going out of three million people. But also, it was a step of faith on the part of the priests because they didn't see anything but this river flood tide.

But they were promised that when the soldiers were in the water, the river would stop flowing.

And of course, it wasn't going to stop instantly. But as they started to walk into it, the waters would start to diminish. And so they were able to pass on dry ground, similar to the Exodus. The priests were told to stand in the middle of the riverbed, upstream from where the people were crossing. That was an assurance to the people that they were not going to get wiped out by the flood because God would have to wipe out the ark first. He always gives us those little assurances. He calls us to act on faith, but he gives us assurances along the way.

Okay. And more of this when we get into the passage for us now, but getting all this historical thing, you and all those people—oh yes, it was noted last night—the one thing about the priests, even though they're a half mile ahead, how do you stop 3 million people who are moving? If they were to stop, they'd get trampled, even though it would take that much for the people to catch up with them. Anyway, so definitely, definitely faith. Thank you.

The land I'm giving them, the sons of Israel. What is that? This is not a new announcement. It's the land that's been promised for generations. Starting with whom? Abraham. And who is Abraham? What do we think of Abraham as being? The patriarch of the nation of Israel.

Yeah, he's the first of the patriarchs. And just another guy, right? I mean, there was no Jewish nation or anything. He was not called Abraham. He was just called Abram initially.

What does that mean? When God said, okay, I want you to do this, and I'm going to promise you this, that was just somebody God by grace selected, right? He wasn't because he was already Jewish. That was a big aha to me at one point in my studying the Bible—that Abram was like anybody else at the time.

What does that mean? I don't know. Exalted father.

How many children did he have? None. None at the time. At the time, the Lord decided to announce that he was changing his name from Abram to Abraham, meaning father of a multitude.

Now, consider what it must have been like, being a wealthy Bedouin, very successful. It meant that he had enough servants that he had a cadre of 413 trained warriors, young men. You had to have your security guard if you had that much wealth. God changes his name, and we know him as the father of the faithful. He is the first person to whom it is said that his faith, his choosing to trust God, made him righteous. Now, God didn't give him the gift of righteousness because he did that. Righteousness basically is trusting God. That's how we can live righteously, act righteously, etc.

Erica and I had fun with this scenario. Imagined, but I think pretty consistent. With desert hospitality, somebody shows up, even your worst enemy, at your tent door you must show him hospitality, invite him in, give him food, lodging, etc. That tradition was for three days—you got to take care of him—and then you need to allow him a safe departure and have him leave, say thank you very much, and then flee for his life.

Okay, so somebody comes and you don't talk until the hospitality. First thing is you serve them a meal. As you know, from some of the stories, that can take a while. It's not just saying, "Hey, grab a soup bowl and dish yourself some out of the stew pot and let's sit down and talk." No, it may mean making the whole meal from scratch.

As you remember, when the angels and the Lord Himself visited Abraham, what does he do? He sends a servant to go and slaughter and butcher a prize calf. He tells Sarah to do, I don't know how many measures of flour, but it was basically five gallons. "Take five gallons of flour and make it into bread"—all hand kneading of the dough—and then it's flatbread. It's like tortillas, hot cakes, but it was unleavened. Almost every culture has something like it.

So you have to serve a meal first. Then they have this meal that Abraham and whoever it is who's come by us. And then it was customary to show off what you got, to show off your family.

"Exalted father, bring out your family." "I haven't got any children." "Exalted father doesn't have any children? This is screwball."

He goes, and later he comes back through. Same thing. Except he's told "not Abram, Abraham". "Oh, wow. This has been an eventful couple of years or whatever it's been—months, how many months? Whoa. Okay, there's going to be an amazing introduction of family after this meal."

"Father of multitudes, bring him out here. He is my one kid."

"Whoa. You people sure like to exaggerate, don't you?"

The Lord changes his name from exalted father to father of a multitude because he has trusted God to make him a multitude, starting with one kid.

So Abraham believed God and God counted to him as righteousness. "You are rightly related to me," which is what righteousness is and all that follows from being rightly related to the true God, the life giver.

This land, promised to Abraham and to his descendants. What are descendants? They are people who have a common ancestry.

What does God promise Abraham? Inheritance? Many people as the sands of the sea. Way beyond just having his own children. As numerous as the dust of the ground, as numerous as the stars of the sky, as numerous as the sand on the seashore.

Each of those has a particular significance. Numerous as the stars—that's the heavenly realm. As numerous as the dust on the ground—that's the earthly realm, sand on the seashore. We will catch this in another verse here.

So, "I promise this land to you and your seed." What is seed? Seed has a common future. The significance of the people who are going to possess this land is they are people of the future that the Lord promises and delivers and develops and grows.

Not a common ancestor, and most people identify themselves with their ancestry, not with their future. What do true believers have in common? They look forward, not backward.

We don't have a common ancestry. Even just looking at the cameos on the screen here, it's evident there is variety. The family of God is made up of people with the entire spectrum of ancestry.

What makes us one people is our common future. It is interesting that there has been such interest in ancestry going on, even among regular people, not necessarily Christians, who are just really wanting to know where they came from.

My brother's one. We have roots in England. He took his son to England, and they went and found all these places where people were buried. It is important to them to find that out.

The contrast you're making with us as believers is that what binds us together is not our past ancestry, but our future with Him.

He describes the territory in verse four from the wilderness to this Lebanon. Why does he say this Lebanon?

He talks about other places. He talks about the Euphrates. He talks about the land of the Hittites. But he doesn't say "this river Euphrates," "this land of the Hittites." Why "this Lebanon"?

What does Lebanon mean? There is a character in patriarchal history who has a name very similar. Same base. Laban: whitey. Lebanon is "white thing". When you look at the Sierras, when you look at Mount Shasta—not this summer—the volcanic peaks up and down the Pacific Coast are not looking like normal because of a very diminished snowfall for years now. Usually, you'll see them snow capped. We were just at Mount Shasta. It's amazing how little snow there was up there.

The wilderness is where they've been ever since Egypt. The Lebanon wilderness doesn't mean like a sand desert, but it's a place of very, very sparse vegetation, practically none.

We read the report of a soldier who was on Operation Desert Storm, and he was on night sentry duty. He described what happened one morning as the sun came up. He was on this barren place. And all of a sudden, he started to see green. It was little shoots, little leaves coming up out of the ground. Then little flowers, very small, little flowers.

The flowers grew, blossomed. Within an hour and a half, they were scorched by the sun and they were dead. Talk about a fast, short lifespan.

It's that kind of wilderness, not sand desert.

As far as the great river, the river Euphrates still exists, still identified. What do we think of when we think of the Euphrates? What other river do we think of in the same breath? The Tigris. And where do we first encounter mention of the Tigris and the Euphrates? The Garden of Eden, right there in the beginning of Genesis.

Tigris and Euphrates, the cradle of civilization. There were two other rivers, and we do not know where they are or exactly where they flowed. We have a description, but they no longer exist.

All the land of the Hittites—who were the Hittites? What's the significance of this?
This is one more identification we want to make tonight.

Hittites: Sons of Heth. That's what Hittite means. Descendants of Heth.

Where did we run into the descendants of Heth?
Who had dealings with the sons of Heth?
What was that dealing?
Very significant in biblical history.

It must be Abraham.

Yes. When you say it must be Abraham, you make me think of the little boy in Sunday school. The teacher asked, "What's gray as a bushy tail, lives in trees, eats acorns?" The little boy said, "If this were any other time I'd say a squirrel, but since this is Sunday school the answer must be Jesus."

Anyway, sons of Heth, what was Abraham's dealing with the sons of Heth?

I don't remember.

The Lord promised that entire land to Abraham and his seed.

When Abraham died, what did he own in that land?

Just the grave?

Yes, the burial place. Who was buried?

First Sarah, and then Abraham.

Who else?

Rachel?

No.

And we will talk about that because it's fascinating.

Let's go through the patriarchs.

Abraham, Isaac, Jacob.

Abraham and Sarah are buried in that tomb. Isaac and Rebecca. Jacob and Leah.

Now, notice. And thank you, Beth, because what most people would is Rachel.

So what does that tell us?

If it's Leah, not Rachel, who's buried with Jacob, who was the Lord's choice for Jacob?

Leah.

Who was Rachel? Whose choice was Rachel? Jacob's.

1. saw 2. good 3.took

Now you took it the proper way by asking and negotiating.

But what is the methodology of the flesh?

What is the problem that arises out of the fall?

How do we make decisions?

With our eyes.

Yes, we see what looks good to us and we take it.

And that is what's behind everything, including all the wars and everything else.

See, good, take.

And what did David do?

He saw the woman bathing on the roof.

"She's good, beautiful, but... close enough."

Well, it started with Eve, right?" Saw that the fruit was good, and so she took it and ate it."

And it was good! The Lord said it was good. But she was deceived.
And therefore, that was not rebellion against the Lord.

And who gets blamed for the fall? Not woman.

In many, many, maybe most people's eyes who do not know better because of learning from the Scripture.

When the Lord asked Adam, he said, "The woman gave to me."

"You know, have you eaten from the tree?"
"The woman gave to me."
"The woman You gave me."
Wham, wham.
Blame them both, and now Adam's on his own. He's just estranged himself from everybody else in his life: God and his wife.

So she gave to me from the tree, and I ate.

And the Lord turns to her and says, "What have you done?"
"The serpent deceived me, and I ate."
He turns to the serpent.
"Because you have done this..." And he curses the serpent.
He never says "because you" to the woman.
He does not blame her.
Because she did not rebel against him.
She crossed the line, but she didn't see the line at the time because she was deceived.

She knew what the commandment was, but when she had become confused by the maneuvering of the tempter into thinking she was doing what was right.

Then to the man, what does He say?

"Because you."

He blamed the serpent, the tempter, and the man.

He did not blame the woman.

He cursed the serpent, and He cursed the ground, not the man.

The curse that came through the man's sin was that it would have a very detrimental effect on the ground and its productivity.

God's work is not part of the curse.

The toil that work is, is part of the curse.

If we are doing the Lord's will, it is not toilsome. It may be exhausting, but it is not. It's not the frustrating, agonizing thing.

We were back on Rachel. If you look carefully—how many girls or women have you known named Rachel? How many named Leah? It is an indicator of who does and doesn't get it.

One of the earliest student couples we worked with named one of their children Leah. They are from Britain, where the name is more common. And we realized that they were giving her a real blessing by naming her Leah.

What do we see of the two, Rachel and Leah? How many children are born to Jacob through Leah? Leah is the mother of six of the twelve sons.

How many through Rachel? Two. The other four were two with each of the concubines who had been the nurses of Rachel and Leah.

What do they name the sons?

Leah names the sons. She runs right down the room and sees a son: Simeon, meaning asked or requested. Continues on, and then Issachar, meaning wages.

Her whole focus initially is on trying to get her husband to love her. She keeps thinking that having sons, which is what he really wants, will endear him to her, but it does not.

She gets down to the end. Who is the last of her six sons?

Judah, meaning praise. "This time I'll just praise the Lord." Beautiful progression.

Rachel's two sons: first, Joseph.

Joseph means "more". Give me more! I got one, I want more."

The names do not mean exactly what the mothers naming them explain as the origin of the name. They are puns, not the joke kind of pun. The Bible is full of puns; some of them are jokes and some of them are not. But they are named because of the similarity of the name to what has inspired it.

And that is the idea of more. She finally gets a son. And what's the response? More. Her second son and only other son. What does she name him? Benjamin. Who named him Benjamin? Jacob named him Benjamin. She named him Benoni: son of my sorrow. Why? She was dying in childbirth.

What is the one direct quote we have other than naming the children? What is the one direct quote we have from her? Who is she speaking to and what does she say? Speaking to her husband, Joseph, Jacob, too many similar sounding names. "Give me children or I'll die."

He's certainly demonstrated that he is able to father children. We have the record of actually getting to have a night with Jacob by basically buying him for mandrakes, which were considered to promote conception.

But anyway, what’s the incident when Jacob is called to the Lord to return to the land of Canaan? What happens when they leave? How do they leave? They sneak out of town.

They take advantage of separation because with the whole thing over the flocks and herds and all that stuff, they had to keep them separate. So they put a two days' journey between Laban's flocks and Jacob's flocks. That provides an opportunity to pack up and get out of town fast, which they did.

Laban pursued them. It was a very interesting interchange there.

Rachel steals the household idols. What are the household idols?

Erica and I have seen a bunch of them in Israel. You're familiar with the notion of the little statues that are then made by people and claimed to have all sorts of divine powers. Isaiah has some wonderful passages mocking that practice.

You find a piece of wood that won't totter and you carve it and you split it up and you decorate it and you put stuff on it and you prop it up so it won't fall over. Then you take half of it and make an idol. You use the other half of it for firewood to cook your dinner.

She steals the household idols. Why would she do that? I presume because they're meaningful to her. Yes, and how? There are cultures today that have this same tradition, and the idols are there, kind of up on the mantelpiece or in a little shrine. Each member of the household has an idol. Only the very elder members of the family are allowed to know whose idol is whose. It's a practical safeguard. If you don't know whose idol is whose, you can't curse somebody else by destroying his idol because you might destroy your own. That would deprive you rather than that other family member of the blessing associated with it.

She snags the household idols, figuring we can have the benefits and you can't use them to put a curse on us because you won't have them. So what does she do when her father shows up? And what does he claim? "You're running off with all my stuff. These are *my* daughter's. *My* grandchildren."

It actually amazes us. It's very natural, but it amazes us all the time that you hear people talking about "my children, my grandchildren" in a situation where the wife or the husband isn't there. Yes, others are relating to you as an individual. But even then, why don't you give a little witness for the Lord and say "our" instead of "mine"? Honor marriage even when your spouse is not present.

But Laban's just thinking of himself. And actually, God actually took these things with a charade, with trying to influence the flocks by imprinting. You may be familiar with that notion; it has been proven scientifically to have no basis whatsoever. But the idea that when a pregnant female sees something, it's going to affect the baby. There are concerns about, "Oh, my gosh, you saw an accident happen. Oh, my gosh, your child's going to be marked and be scarred because of that happening in the womb," etc.

So this imprinting game: if you remember, Jacob was peeling rods and putting them at the watering troughs. There was a lot of mating that took place at the watering troughs. The ewes didn't have a choice but to drink water. That made them very vulnerable to rams that were thinking like rams think with a female. He was supposed to get the speckled ones and Laban was going to get the pure colored ones.

And as it was pointed out, Laban changed that arrangement ten times when he saw that Jacob's flocks were multiplying a lot because of this basis by which they decided whose they were. He would change it the other way around. Lo and behold, it was the other ones who were producing lots of kids and lambs. Ten times he changed it. Don't you get it? It's not the scheming. It's not the arrangement. It's the Lord. And that's what Leah and Rachel say that this is, including "we are your wages for the work that you've done." Our father tried to cheat you again and again, and the Lord wouldn't let him. The Lord blessed Jacob, and Laban was a pretty conniving figure, so he got his just due.

Okay, we got there with who's in the tomb, the land of the Hittites. What does Abraham have when he dies? He's got the grave, all the dead bodies and their bones. What else has he got? He's got descendants. He's got the beginning of descendants. But in terms of possessions on earth, just the grave. Death. And the promise of life.

Now, he has life because he is righteous. He has a really living relationship with the Lord because he trusts the Lord, which is what every human being should do, and should have done all along. So he's the winner.

He got death and the promise of future possessions and the promise of a vast influence that his life would be spread. We have the life of Abraham as those who trust the Lord.

I probably heard Erica recount what Jimmy Carter told us years ago when we were on a run with him in the hills. His best friend diplomatically was Anwar Sadat, and they were riding in—Carter in his genuinely humble way, said it was a taxi, of course it was a taxi, Secret Service limousine or the counterpart, wherever they were. Sadat asked him, he said, "I'm puzzled. I know why Arabs look to Abraham as our father. I know why the Jews look to Abraham as our father, but Christians, I don't get it."

Carter got a chance to explain the gospel and explain that it's the faith of Abraham. "We are descendants of Abraham by faith, not by genetics." Sadat clearly heard the gospel clearly presented. It was a month or two before he was assassinated. Carter actually had that experience with at least one other head of state where he was able to do that.

This is what we've got. Joshua is being called to lead God's people into possession of what He promised, starting with Abraham.

We haven't gotten into the significance for us as Christians, which is humongous, and that's why we want to look at this. That's why this is so foundational for biblical counseling: to understand this, and we will unpack that together, continue to unpack it the next couple of times together.

Beth, would you pray for us to finish up our time?

> Lord, it's just amazing to start to delve a little bit into the richness of Your word. May we let that be a spur to have our minds open to the richness of Your love and Your purposes and Your plans—so large and so amazing—and yet we get to be a part of them. Thank You for this time together. Thank You for Steve and Erica sharing what You have given to them over the decades, and thank You for the means by which we can gather, which wasn't available even just a few years ago. I pray we would keep seeking You through spending time with You, especially in Your word.

> Jesus, we pray in Your name.

Amen.