> Let's pray.
>
> Lord, thank you that we belong to you, that you are King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and yet so personal in your love for each one of us.
> Thank you for calling us to you.
> Thank you that each of us here heard you and responded, and may we keep responding to your call forward in growth in you. Lord, thank you for these rich texts that we get to be in that address all of our issues, the human issues that have been the human issues since the beginning of the human race.
> Thank you that you don't leave us to try to figure it out ourselves, though there is much to figure out, pray over and figure out.
> But thank you that you give us the wisdom for life, for good life, healthy life, whole life, good relationships.
> And you give us high purpose to be part of your work in a broken world and starting in us.
>
> Lord, thank you for the texts tonight.
> May we gain vision from you about your equipping and your calling to maturity, to walking much more deeply with you and then equipped to be forerunners for others, to show the way, to share the way.
> And thank you that it doesn't take perfection to do that, but just growth and all under your grace.
>
> Lord, give us each one of us ears to hear what's especially for us, both for our own lives and for showing others that you've connected us with now and later.
> Thank you that your word never goes forth and comes back void, that you bring so much life through truth as it's communicated in love.
> Thank you, Lord, for your work among us.
> In your name, amen.
> Amen.

If you saw the teaser, the prep guide, our focus tonight, as we have been,
on the call to maturity and what does that look like in the Lord and how can we be forerunners for others?
Alan's picture is perfect because in this modern age, we tend with computers and AI and technology, we tend to expect that things will happen in record time and it can with technology, but
growth of life has never happened that way, and it still doesn't.

Whether it's growth of plants, for those who know agriculture, or animals, or people, growth takes time.
And good growth takes a lot of time and a lot of attention. And so that's the equipping that the Lord gives us of His life and the wisdom from His word, how to grow in ways that really show forth the Lord in what we manage, as well as in our relationships, and how to grow into the beautiful, strong character of God that He has given us by the Holy Spirit.

As you know, as we've been in Hebrews much of this quarter, we're not looking detail by detail as we normally would, because this was addressed to people out of the Jewish faith or seekers who were attracted to the Jewish faith in the Roman Empire, who were returning to the old. The pressure was too great from the community around them. Ostracism and criticism was too much. They were afraid that maybe they were missing out. I know with ministry that I've done, that we've done with people at the end of their lives, it's not been infrequent, even with believers, that we've been asked, "I've always believed, but how do I know?" That desire for certainty is a strong one, and it's meant to be in all of us, and the Lord gives us certainty. It has been wonderful to answer that and give people assurance who are believers.

Tonight, we're starting back in a quick focus. We're skipping the parts that were especially important for the Jewish people of Jewish background—the law, the worship—that was all a foreshadowing of what we have now. Much of Hebrews is showing how the old form was all a picture and a foreshadowing of what we now have. It is a powerful one.

We encourage you to do your own study and use cross-references to tie it back to where these things come up in the Old Testament. Our focus and our reason for being in there is to look at the timeless truths that were true then and are true now even and enabled even more because of Jesus.

We will be focusing on a few key passages and then settling deeply in the last one. We start back where we finished last week with the hope in at the end of Hebrews six, and we'll look at that because we all need hope.

Then we will settle in what has the Lord already done for us as we have received in the time of the new covenant, not the old of law, the new covenant where the law is written on our hearts. We'll look at that and the implications of that, both for myself and for people that I have the opportunity to serve, because there are powerful implications for counseling and for encouragement of those around you, but starting with yourself. You can't proclaim what you haven't walked in yourself.

That is in Hebrews 8 and 10, and we'll be looking at those in the antecedent in Jeremiah 31. Then we will briefly whet your appetite with Hebrews, the beginning of Hebrews 11. We have been told, "It is by faith and patience we inherit the promises of God." So what does that faith look like?

It is not what a lot of us tend to think at first. It is not just praying for and asking God to zap, make us perfect. Then everything is just great. It's is learning to walk the long trail of growth with the Lord. How to do that. What is that faith? What does it produce for us and for others that is visible and tangible?

Then we'll be looking at settling in Hebrews 12. How do we run the race set before us by the Lord? How do we run with endurance and not grow weary and lose heart? He will give three big keys to that that apply to every one of us. Understanding what the Father is doing in our lives. Why aren't things just perfect and happy right now? What is the process that He's inviting us into? And then two other main areas of growth that applies to everybody: how we relate to parents who are imperfect in their training versus the Lord who is perfect in His training, but our flesh still resists it. And then the issue of bitterness.

Every time things don't go the way I was counting on them, I'm either building bitterness or trust. We'll look at how to stay on top of that so that you can hear the Lord and move forward with Him rather than get stuck and be miserable.

We're covering a lot tonight and let's start in.

We're actually going back to where the Tuesday class finished last week. They didn't get quite as far as we did on Wednesday night, so this is a really quick review.

Hebrews 6:19-20, the end of the chapter:

**"This hope we have is an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, one which enters within the veil, for Jesus has entered as a forerunner for us, having become a high priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek."**

That is the order of Melchizedek, the eternal priesthood, timeless.

The issue here is really entering within the veil. The image is anchoring a ship into the harbor when a storm's coming. But the point is that Jesus has entered into the safe haven of the presence of God directly. The veil was between the holy place and the holy of holies. The holy place only priests could enter, bringing the sacrifice, etc. But the Holy of Holies, the inner sanctuary, the innermost sanctuary, is where only the high priest can enter only once a year on the Day of Atonement.

That is the day of celebrating forgiveness, for even the things that we don't realize were not God's will that we engaged in or thought or coddled. No one could enter this presence, entering directly into the presence of God as made evident in the light, the Shekinah glory, the glory that was dwelling with Israel in the heart of people in the form of a radiant light, the source of which is not visible. This place would be naturally dark, surrounded by curtains and having no light in it. And yet there was light in the holy place where the priests entered daily! Only the high priest with the blood of atonement could enter, and that was an annual thing that had to be repeated each year.

But Jesus entered the true tabernacle, the heavenly one, of which the earthly tabernacle was a physical depiction, carrying His blood, the ultimate sacrifice, the sacrifice that atoned for all the sins of all humanity for all time, as we're reminded in 1 John 2, the first couple of verses, and He is the atonement for our sins, not for ours only, but also for the whole world. As we've noted, what we obtain by coming to Jesus is not forgiveness. Jesus has purchased forgiveness for every human being. The difference between believers and unbelievers is those who recognize their need for it and therefore welcome it and benefit from it. And then there are those, although they're forgiven, who don't see the need for it. They don't want it.

This is our ability and Jesus as the forerunner, like the anchor of a ship, to pull us in with Him. When Jesus died on the cross, the veil was torn in two from the top to the bottom. It was God who ripped the veil, not a human act, symbolizing that the way is open. The way by Jesus' blood, meaning accepting His atonement for my sins, and then the hope of being grown up and purified to become sinless in practice, which does not happen complete, does not become complete during this lifetime, but it's a lifetime of making progress. A lot of progress. But making progress in accordance with how much growth we welcome.

Steve has just mentioned, we mentioned it last time, that hope being the anchor of the soul is a very powerful picture of when ships in the stormy Mediterranean knew a storm was coming and they did not have good shelter, they would drop anchors in the safe harbor and then get out, where they would not be knocking against rocks and other ships.

Even though in the picture for us, we get tossed around by the storms of life, we have the hope our anchor is safe in the Lord's presence. Jesus is the forerunner and we will get there no matter how rough the seas are at the moment. That is a powerful picture of strong hope, of confidence, not I hope, maybe, this is, I know.

We are going to skip to Hebrews 8:10-12. There has been discussion, particularly of the difference between the Old Covenant and the New Covenant. The old covenant is based on law and God's people obeying that law. It can also be translated instruction. It is His instructions on how to live life as He intends it to be.

As it says in the passage, "My covenant works, which they broke." Of course they did, because no person in his natural strength could possibly keep all of God's instructions for life. God knew they would, but at least they were given the information. We have known devout Jews who love the law with the perspective that God loves us enough to have told us how to succeed in living a godly life.

Then there is a new covenant. Hebrews 8:10-12: "This is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord." This is from the prophet Jeremiah, Jeremiah 31:33-34.

**"I will put my laws into their minds."** The Hebrew literally says into their midst. The Septuagint, the Greek translation, translated that as mind. What else could God mean in a context of Greek philosophy? But actually, it is accurate. **"And I will write them upon their hearts and I will be their God and they shall be my people."** Notice this progression: put it into their mind, inform us of it, and then write it upon their hearts. This is for those who welcome it and choose to respond to God's revelation by internalizing what He informs them is how to live a truly fulfilling life and fruitful in its impact on others.

**"And I will be their God and they shall be my people."** Meaning, in practice, that I will be leading them, instructing them, and they will respond to that and will become people who not only live in harmony with Me, God speaking, and come to become more and more God-like in practice and expressing more and more of the reality of who God is, which is what we were created for, created in God's image.

We were created to be living representations of the Lord God and His character and to be accurate portrayals. But sin really corrupted that.

**"And they shall not teach everyone his fellow citizen and everyone his brother saying, 'Know the Lord,' for they shall all know Me, from the least to the greatest. For I will be merciful to their iniquities."**

That's the deviant tendency to wander off from the direction the Lord points us. **"And I will remember their sins no more."** The acts of doing that.

This is the promise. We are the beneficiaries of that. That's what Hebrews is pointing out here.

After talking about the tabernacle, the portable sanctuary, the next section is Hebrews 10:14-25.

Further talking about the way the tabernacle was set up and the equipment in it as an instructive depiction. And then it comes back again to Jeremiah 31 with one little alteration.

Hebrews 10:14: **"For by one offering He has perfected for all time those who are sanctified. And the Holy Spirit also bears witness to us. For after saying, 'This is the covenant I will make with them after those days,' says the Lord, 'I'll put My laws upon their heart and by their mind I will write them.'"**

Notice the flip in the order! The other says in the mind and then the heart. This says write them on their heart and then put them in the mind.

We have now moved from accepting the Lord's life to living it out. How do we live it out? By letting ourselves be informed by what He's written on our heart, the heart being the place of the essence of what a person is and the seat of will, of objective, of determination, of purpose.

Now having internalized by receiving the life of Jesus in the form of the Holy Spirit, one of the persons of the Godhead. Having God the Holy Spirit dwelling in our hearts, the core of our being and the place from which all motivation and power and direction for life comes within us.

And so then calling that to our mind at times of opportunities to live it out. But now, as we see what God tells us in His written word, instead of that being something external and a demand on us, which the flesh, the natural, corrupt, sinful tendency that is part of every human body since the fall, and will be and will always be in every human body until that body dies.

The flesh is not redeemed. It's not healed. But we are learning to take control of that and live the new life in spite of that opposition. And so this is that procedure.

**"And their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no more."**

The issue now, because it's the essential will of every true believer to do the will of God, performance failures in the process of learning to live it out are not the issue, because those don't indicate who we are; that just indicates where we have not yet grown up in that area to maturity.

The attitude of a parent towards a rebellious resistant child is one thing, but the attitude of a parent towards a child who is eager to learn and to grow and to do the right thing, but is learning the skill of actually doing that in practice, the attitude of the parent is very different.

Those are just indicators of where you have opportunity and need to grow more.

The child picks up the crayon and scribbles purple lines and circles over the picture, who is trying to x out the picture and get rid of it, is viewed by the parents very differently from the child who is scribbling just as aimlessly because it's the child's desire to color the picture, but it doesn't know how to do it.

And so you will learn it. That's okay. And if you scribble off the page and out of the floor, that's fine, provided that that's not a willful act of rebellion.

But if that's just the way the crayons strayed, well, okay, well, we'll now turn to learning how to clean the crayon markings off the floor. And that's a chance for more instruction.

And the child that is really eager to learn will say, "Oh, great, now I get to learn that."

So the Lord doesn't need to make an issue of our failures once our heart determination is to become like Him and pleasing.

We've used the example of some friends of ours who had twin boys and they were busy doing all of the no-no's while singing the list of all the no-no's. They knew every one, and they were systematically doing every one of them the way that they were not supposed to do. They were taking great delight in willfully, intentionally, systematically breaking all the rules. And, of course, wise parents helped them with that with some strong help, and they've become good, awesome young men now.

I had a teacher once who used to like to say, what every young man needs while he's growing up is a good pat on the back. Hard enough, often enough, and low enough. But here the heart has changed. Our heart has changed. Once you've received the Lord, our heart determination is to join the Lord and all He calls us to. But we've got a big gap between what's written on our heart and our practice, and that's the rest of our lives—learning to step with the Lord, to take charge of that rebellious flesh that all of us have, and to walk with the Lord and display Him instead, His beautiful life, which is now mine.

There are some beautiful implications of this. One thing is encouragement. We're all called to encourage one another, and Hebrews has emphasized that, because we're too close to our own lives, and we can get discouraged because we're looking at the failures. But we get to encourage one another forward.

I know who you are. I've seen the growth. You will get there.

The anchor within the soul is that the Lord is the forerunner. He's already in the presence of the Lord, and we will make it. He's already written His full law in our hearts. That's our essential will now as believers.

That has some wonderful implications for ourselves and for counseling and encouragement to others and prayer. Because it says, first and foremost, for me and for any other believer, my will is at the core to do the will of God. That is my will. It's true of every believer.

Using the example of forgiveness: if someone has hurt you and maybe hurt you repeatedly, it's easy to get mad and want to make sure they never do it again and take vengeance. Then again, the Lord says, forgive.

What? That seems pretty weak as a response, but "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do", as Jesus said from the cross.

If I forgive, then they can just do it again. But it's giving up the offense factor to the Lord, for the Lord to be at work. It's easy to pray and say, Lord, I know I should, but I don't feel like it. So please change my feelings. It'll be a long process to get there.

If you realize that's already your will, it's already written on your heart. So it's more just welcoming what is true. Jesus has said it's forgiven, so it is. The fact is, it is forgiven. He's paid a terrible price for whatever it was.

Instead of trying to work up a feeling, I can say, "Thank you, Lord, my will has changed to join Yours. Your law is written on my heart," and so I welcome living that out. It's the right thing, and it is living in accordance with reality.

So you forgive. So do I. It's not waiting for an emotion, not waiting for God to change my emotions. I won't feel like it, but I get to go to the Lord and join Him in what He has made true for me as well as that other person.

The key is the prayer we've turned against—the Gethsemane prayer—which actually is the key element in the Lord's Prayer: "Your kingdom come, Your will be done on Earth as it is in heaven." Or as a friend of ours termed it in a beautiful musical rendition of the Lord's Prayer: "Your kingdom come, Your will be done right here as it is in heaven."

And so that's where the gospel starts. But then where does it end? With Jesus living that out to the ultimate in His choosing to go to the cross, even though everything in Him, except for the Spirit, was fighting against it as hard as possible. His aversion to death was not sin. He had designed into human beings the survival instinct, and it was alive and well in Him as He was in Gethsemane and approached the cross.

Two other implications of this that are practical and powerful: One is that this really turns all of Scripture into a prayer book, things I can pray from. Because the law is already written on my heart.

What does it mean to be a wife or a husband? We have Scripture on that. It's already written on my heart. "Lord, please, I give myself to You to walk this out in practice. Teach me how to do it. Thank You that my essential will is already there." And so thank You.

A Scripture that's helped me, an adjunct Scripture, is John 15, abiding in the vine. Verse seven: "If you abide in Me, dwell in Me, rest in Me, and My words abide in you, ask whatever you wish and it shall be done for you."

So what I'm doing is I'm praying Scripture. "Lord, it's already my essential will to join You in this. Please accomplish this in me. Help me to make the growth steps to grow into it in practice." But my will has already changed. And that is so helpful. It's not trying to become who I'm not, but growing into who I already am. And that's a big difference.

The other implication that I've found very powerful is as I see other believers that maybe are blowing it right and left, I can pray that from Scripture for them because their will has already changed by the Holy Spirit. So as I pray from Scripture for them in the area where they're walking in the old instead of the new, I don't need to say "if it's your will." I know it is. I know it's already written on their hearts as a new creature in Christ.

And so now I'm joining the Lord in intercession for them, as I do for myself, to grow into who they are. As I do that, I'm really welcoming the Lord to go to work, who is poised and eager to go to work. The Holy Spirit will be there from the inside of them, already pointing these things out, bringing it to their minds, urging them forward.

"There's life here that you're missing. Go for it. Don't stay stuck. Let's move forward." So there are a lot of powerful implications of this.

In here, you're talking about the way being inaugurated for us through the veil that is His flesh. He's pointing out the parallel that just as the veil, which blocked entry into the holy place, was torn into, so Jesus' body was torn. We celebrate that when we take communion. This is Christ's body that was broken for you to enable it, to give us access, direct access to God. And then this is the blood of Christ poured out for you, and then to be drunk symbolically in the wine of the communion.

Remember that the Lord gave us, He spoke to Noah, the first clue as to the one-to-one correspondence with every aspect in the physical creation and the spiritual, that not to eat flesh, inaugurating eating meat, eating flesh, but do not eat it with the blood in it.

I think the issue is not the blood so much as not to eat animals alive as predatory animals do. Not eat them with the blood still in it, with the life still circulating in it. We are instructed to kill, to slaughter animals what we are going to eat and then eat it.

But in communion is Jesus' body being broken for us to open access to direct access to God, and then the blood of His life being poured into us, symbolic of the Holy Spirit coming in to, He has in every true believer, to reproduce the life of Christ in us.

We are told then, **"Let us draw near with a sincere heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, our bodies washed with pure water, let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering. For He who promised is faithful."**

That's our hope in God fulfilling His promises. Promise of making us to be true sons of God. Every believer is a child of God because in welcoming God in, and as God the Father places the Holy Spirit within, that's the new birth. We now have the life of the Father in us, but there's the question of our hope of the new life.

**"Let us consider how to stimulate one another to love and good deeds,"** to be growing up into the maturity of then taking up responsibility for the inheritance of new life that God's given us.

That is when we enter into becoming not merely children, but sons, regardless of human gender. The reference is to the responsibility of a son who is to manage the inheritance from the Father, according to the Father's will. We'll get into that more in chapter 12.

**"Let us consider how to stimulate one another to love and good deeds."** Using the analogy of a parent with children, when a child is learning to walk, they spend most of their time falling down.

The parents aren't there saying, why did you fall down? Oh, you're never going to walk. No, they're getting excited about the baby steps and you'll make it. God is faithful. You will make it. It's already written on your heart. You're growing into who you are. You will make it.

Look, you just took a step. And then the baby very likely falling down. "Oh, I fell down." The parents are saying, "No, you took a step. This time you took three steps before you fell down. You're making progress." Helping the children put their focus on the hope is what we get to do with one another. **Not forsaking our own assembling together as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another all the more as you see the day drawing near**, as we draw closer and closer to the point where Jesus will complete it all—the twinkling of an eye.

We don't have to worry about getting it all done before we can go to be with Jesus and our Heavenly Father in a perfect world. Notice the assembling together to encourage one another and stimulate one another to love and good deeds.

The process of growing into the new life is a significant one. It's a challenging one. We get to encourage one another in our own lives. We're in too close to it and we tend to see where we've blown it. But a fellow believer can say, yes, it's true, but you've grown and you are growing and you will grow. Keep going.

Every baby step is an encouragement to me as well as to you. And so it's noticing to encourage, and we all need that. We're in too close to our own lives.

Moving into the beginning of Hebrews 11, which has been called the Great Hall of Fame of Faith, and that's a very good title for it.

**"Now faith is the assurance of what’s hoped for, the conviction of things not seen."** It takes a lot to unpack that.

We spent a month on this verse with the world-renowned philosopher that we met with and read Scripture together with for 27 years—an hour a week for 27 years.

He was an expert in philosophical Greek but didn’t know the biblical Greek. Steve had that, and we really worked this one over.

The biblical Greek actually is a simplified form. It’s the everyday street language, not the high literary language, which is why Luke has been considered to be the most beautiful piece of literature ever written in the Greek language. But this was the everyday. This was the street language. This is what business transactions were done in. It’s just easier.

**Faith is the assurance of what’s hoped for**. It is a confidence that what we are placing our hope in is real, that we’re not going to be disappointed. It can be the assurance. It can be translated as the substance. It’s the underlying thing. It’s what underlies our hope and conviction of things not seen.

By the way, remember the essence of faith is trust. That’s what the verb from which the noun faith derives is: to be convinced. If I am convinced that something’s the truth, then I’m convinced to trust in that as the truth and act accordingly.

God has much more for us, and we exercise faith in order to appropriate that. This is how we obtain the benefits of what is promised: by trusting in practice. We are hoping for what we don’t yet see. Romans, Paul makes a point of that. Why would we bother to hope in what we see? We already got it. Hope is a patient and confident expectation of something yet to become reality and practice.

That can be very short term. I hope there'll be chocolate frosting on my birthday cake. You're going to see the birthday cake in 10 minutes. But it can be very, very long term, too.

Look at God's hope for the human race, of the entire course of human history and redemption history, what it takes to and what it has taken to realize the potential with which God has created us. His competence and His hope is very, very long term.

It says in verse 2, "**for by it**, by this trust, **the men of old obtained a testimony.**" It's literally "obtained a testimony". It can be legitimately translated "gained approval". But the point is not being approved of.

As we read the chapter, the point is that these people's lives, their exercise of faith, demonstrated the reality of the hope which is trusted in, demonstrates that God does what He promises.

What this is saying is as we trust the Lord for what is unseen but is true—His law written on our hearts, that we're a new creation—we get to grow into that. And He is faithful to bring us all the way through.

As we trust Him and act on that, we gain a testimony. People see it in practice. People can look at our lives and say, wow, that really demonstrates that what God promises, He does deliver.

Faith is the way that we access the unseen and make it seen. For us and for others, because we love to hear testimonies of people trusting the Lord and seeing what God does.

Moses' whole story is like that. All the people are ready to give up and run back to slavery in Egypt because it's too long and too hard out here. But one man says, we have seen God's works. We know He is here. We know He is calling us forward into a new life. So we're going to trust Him for this. One man, Moses, does. All of us see the Lord with what He does in enabling them to conquer much more powerful enemies, providing food and water in a place that is waterless.

We see God in the concrete because of one man, Moses, trusting in what God promises and the invisible becomes visible to all of us. And that's what we get to do. And by the way—that's the source of the scientific method. You have a proposal, a declaration of what is believed to be true, but then you put it to the test and demonstrate it in practice. Do that enough, and the hypothesis becomes a theorem, and then eventually, if it has been demonstrated so consistently that it is now the general consensus that we will never find an exception to this, it becomes accepted as a law because this is just the way it is.

If anybody could actually prove a legitimate exception to a law of science, it would be demoted to a theorem. This is talking about things that are invisible, like gravity, but being able to say, we know it exists, and this is how it works.

Here, it's ultimate truth of what God does in a human life that welcomes Him and that we will grow in His character. And we see that. We have worked with people for the long run, 50 years, and we have seen the Lord radically change people, even those who were trying not to change. We've seen some pretty strong examples of people where if we looked at them just by themselves, you'd say, "Oh my gosh, no hope here." But we have watched the Lord change and eventually bring out His beautiful character in them.

It's the hard way to go. It's much better to welcome the process instead of fight it. One of the pastors who was very influential in my development of my ministry, particularly with biblical counseling, talked about his testimony. He would talk about him being dragged kicking and screaming into the kingdom of God, how hard he fought against it and finally gave in, and of course was exceedingly happy and blessed that he did.

Now I'm going to skip over some specific examples here. Hebrews 11:6: **"Without faith it is impossible to please God. He who comes to God must believe two things: one, that He is,"** which is what most people, if they're asked the question, "Do you believe in God?" say, "Oh, yes." It used to be, Erica noted last night, I'm not so sure how strong it was, about 95% of Americans on a poll would say they believe in God. That is not believing in the biblical sense. They are assenting to this first thing, must believe that He is. Actually, that's probably mostly, "Yes, well, I think there is," or "There probably is a God." Erica proposed that the percentages may have dropped recently. I think they may have. Must believe that He is and that He is a rewarder of those who seek Him. And both are true. Then immediately Noah being warned about things not yet seen, warned by God. Nothing that he saw would affirm what God was telling him. In reverence, he prepared an ark for the salvation of his household, by which he condemned the world and became an heir of the righteousness which is according to faith.

By faith, Abraham, when he was called, obeyed by going out to a place which he was to receive for inheritance. He went out not knowing where he was going, but he knew who he was following.

We encourage you. This is whetting your appetite to go back through these stories. Because we have the advantage of seeing a whole life where we're part way in our lives, so we're in too close. But we can be encouraged as we look at others who are forerunners and we see the whole life where they've trusted. If you think about actually living in their sandals and what they were dealing with to see how they trusted, not perfectly. It doesn't take perfect trust, just growing and what the Lord accomplished and made the Lord visible through their trust.

You don't have to trust God for everything all the time to see that God answers, fulfills His promises to people who trust in Him. All you have to do is trust in Him for something He's promised and see Him fulfill it. Now you've got some evidence, and then that encourages you to do it with some other things: "taste and see that the Lord is good."

Now I want to note one particular example here, and that's in verses 17 to 19: **"By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises was offering up his only begotten son, to whom it is said, 'In Isaac your seed shall be called.'"**

It's not descendants. Most modern translations will translate that way. It's literally seed. It is helpful to recognize that because descendant makes reference to the past, to ancestry. But seed carries the power for the future, for reproducing and propagating the life and spreading it.

We are not merely descendants of those with faith. We are the seed, and we collectively are called the seed, singular, of Abraham and of the Lord.

But note here, it says, "He considered that God is able to raise even from the dead," from which he also received him back as a type. He did not kill Isaac. He was willing to. Why?

Because notic eit said he was offering his only begotten son, to whom it was said in Isaac, "Your seed shall be called." God had told him that his future line of human beings would come through Isaac. From that, we can infer that as he obeyed God, he had two things in mind. One, God said, "Come and offer him up." That was custom at that time. People would kill, and we see in the tragic times of the kingdom period with Israel, even an Israelite king sacrificing his son, the heir to the throne, publicly on the wall of the city to try to get God to turn the attackers away.

That was a pagan practice. Something God hated.

Here God seems to be calling him to what the false gods called people to. He was familiar with this custom, but he knew that God had said it's through Isaac. "I promised you a multitude, an innumerable multitude of descendants. And it's going to come through Isaac. So give up Isaac to me."

Abraham demonstrated that he was willing to do it. But note here the interpretation: "He considered God is able to raise even from the dead." He knew that, if he was actually to offer his son sacrificially and he died, the future would still be realized through him.

The only way to do it is God has got to bring him back to life.

Well, it turned out, much to his great relief. There's a magnificent painting of Abraham by Rembrandt, just having let go of the knife as the angel calls to him, "Abraham, Abraham." "Here I am." "Hey, I'm listening."

The beautiful thing was father and son were learning to trust the Lord.

There's a beautiful note in the Hebrew text. Three times in that narrative, it says they went on as one. It gets translated in English as "they went on together," but the Hebrew term for together is one. They went on as one up the mountain, and they came back as one.

It did not drive them apart. It pulled them together, both of them to trust the Lord. And Isaac had to trust the Lord.

His father was, at this point old. Abraham is approaching 120 approximately at that point. Isaac about 18 years old.

You really think that the 120-year-old man can grab his 18-year-old son and, against his will, tie him up and throw him on top of a funeral pyre?

No.

The point here is strong trust made the Lord visible, and it was faith, not trust in what I want God to say but in what the Lord actually said. And that's the pointer: it's in what God has promised because Abraham recognized the promise in Isaac: "Your seed will be called."

A little example from marriage: In the marriage Ephesians 5 passage, the bottom line is the husband is called to love his wife as Christ loves the church. And she's called to respect him, to delight in him as the leader appointed by God, and respect—not perfect—who he is as a man of God, even though he's still growing, still learning.

And he to love her, even though she's still growing. The husband and wife who trust the Lord to do their part will see the other grow. And we've seen it. We're coming up on our 50th anniversary. And we're still learning.

But there's a lot of joy in the journey.

You get to look at the rest of Hebrews 11 yourself.

But he finishes actually verse 39: **"All these, having gained a testimony**, obtained a testimony. We see the Lord as they trusted the Lord to do it His way, **did not receive what was promised because God had provided something better for us, that apart from us, they should not be made perfect.** And they didn't receive what had been promised. They received a lot of what had been promised them, but they didn't receive the fullness of it. They didn't receive the ultimate.

Several millennia after Abraham and such, we were just looking at that prophecy promise in Jeremiah where about three and a half millennia after that was uttered, we are experiencing, we have available to us the fullness. We are living in a very, very privileged time of human history. None of us as believers begin to realize how much the Lord has made available to us to grow into and to make Him visible again.

The encouragement is to go for it, not to just kind of lollygag along and just live life, but to go for the richness that the Lord wants to make available. So that's where we settle now for the last part of the class: how do we run the race that's set before each of us with endurance so that we don't become weary and lose heart because it's a long race? The race is the race of growth. How do we grow into who we are already at the core and make the invisible God visible in our lives? That's what He's talking about.

We get to the beginning of Hebrews 12:

**"Therefore, since we have so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance and the sin which so easily entangles us. Let us run with endurance the race that is set before us, fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith."**

I used to think, oh my gosh, surrounded by the great cloud of witnesses, they're all looking to see what I'm doing wrong. But it's not that at all. It's witnesses of God's faithfulness in their lives, and they're watching to see us and encouraging us on.

The thing is to drop the ungodly baggage that we've been carrying along with us, drop the garbage that we picked up and internalized from various sources. And the sin which so easily entangles us—that's external temptation.

As we looked in 1 Corinthians 10 at the three categories of unbelief or disobedience: first, it was that from within—the sin of the golden calf was the Israelites, when they didn't know what happened to Moses, just doing what came naturally to them from their experience growing up in Egypt. So they made a human-made idol, an image of what they think God would be like. The second issue was the sin that they fell into because of the influence of the unbelieving people around them—the sin which so easily entangles us. And then finally, discontent with the way God is managing things, and so with those who are appointed by God to lead.

Run with endurance the race that's set before us.

Steve: I have to be careful here because I'm a lifelong runner. I was a competitive runner. The imagery here is so real to me.

Erica: When Steve was helping to coach the cross-country team at Stanford years ago in the 1970s, one of the team members was in my freshman dorm. This picture of the sin that so easily entangles us: he seemed to find every root on every trail and end up flat in the mud again and again. He came back with dirt on his knees and on his face, and he just seemed to find every root no matter where they went. He would go down and everybody else would have to look and see what he tripped over this time.

It took strong encouragement to him to keep running the race. Neat guy, but he seemed to find every root.

And so it's been helpful to us to say, "Lord, what are the encumbrances that I'm packing along that seemed right, but are really making life burdensome?" And what's the sin that keeps tripping me up? Because I want to run this race with endurance. I want to run it with You, Lord. I want to get there and not get tripped up.

Running, you begin to realize any extra poundage you're carrying along and any strides that are not helpful, especially in a long-distance race.

So ask the Lord, look and see where are you packing extra stuff that's getting in the way? Where are you getting tripped up? Because there's usually a pattern. But don't get fixated on it. Glue your eyes on the Forerunner.

And that's where he goes here. How do you run it with endurance? Fixing our eyes on Jesus, **"the author and perfecter of faith."**

I have a very graphic image of this in running Bay Breakers back in the 50,000 people era. Two images have stuck very much in my mind from that race: one was when it got to the top of the Hay Street Hill. I think one of the other guys in the team said "look back!" We did look back and all the way down the hill that we had run up to Market Street and then disappearing, as far as you can see, just nothing but a sea of runners.

The other image was after we were in Golden Gate Park and I knew that well. I ran there, but I didn't run down the main drive which is for cars. Of course, no cars were allowed during the race. This was looking ahead. The first hundred runners had spread out significantly. I was looking ahead in this beautiful setting where I'd run before, but not in a race like this. A couple of hundred yards, maybe a quarter mile ahead, was one runner. It opened up that much of a gap back to me. And it was so amazing because it would have been easy either to get lulled by the beautiful setting in which I'd run before, and it was enjoyable recreational running, but this is the middle of a race, or to be discouraged by seeming practically to be running on my own. But there's another runner ahead: if he can do it, I can do it.

Looking ahead to Jesus. Not looking at myself, not looking at others but keeping my eyes glued on the forerunner I will get there. Here we're talking about the calling to the cross Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith, who "for the joy set before him endured the cross."

Now, the joy was definitely not the cross. It was all of us. The joy was what going to the cross would accomplish for others, the life that He would give others through the sacrifice. The interesting thing is "for the joy set before him endured the cross despising the shame."

The issue for Jesus, but you know a lot of people were crucified. The Romans found it a very effective way to maintain order because they crucified publicly. They would be right alongside a road. People would be going on and they'd leave the bodies there until they rotted and fell off. People were constantly reminded of what could happen to them if the Romans felt that they were really resisting them.

But what was the big thing for Jesus? It wasn't the pain. It was just as painful for Jesus as it was for anyone else who was crucified. We use the term excruciating for extreme pain. That simply means being crucified is literally what excruciating means—from the cross.

But what was the issue for Him that was not true for anyone else? Despising the shame. Here He was, He had come to do the will of the Father, and He had done the Father's will perfectly throughout His earthly life, all along. The whole point was to save us from the corruption and tragedy of sin.

Yet, what is the result that He's seeing? The night before, the disciples, the guys that He's been training up, these dozen characters that He has spent three years training to carry on after He's gone. What are they focused on? Which one of them is the greatest? The whole point is becoming humble like Jesus. They proved that they had flunked that course.

So He was having to trust the Father that the plan would work. But putting His hope in what is not seen. What it would take for the disciples then in their position as apostles to carry on the gospel would be having the Holy Spirit indwelling because they didn't have the Spirit yet and that wouldn't happen until Jesus left. "Trust me son, you have to let go of what you got in order to give these guys what nobody has yet. And you've got to let go of everything that you could put your hopes in other than what I promised." Now, the shame was that here he is. He is the answer to all the problems of the world. And what is the crucifixion declaring? Publicly being proclaimed to be not the answer, but the problem. All we have to do to have a wonderful world is get rid of this guy who thinks he's got it. And so that required faith such as no one has ever had to exercise and Father fulfilled his promises and Jesus then sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. That's the position of executive authority.

The supreme ruler declares his will, but his right hand man is the one who makes it happen. And so he is in that position eternally with regard to us because of what he did.

So consider him who's endured such hostility by sinners against him so that you may not grow weary and lose heart. You have not yet resisted to the point of shedding blood and you're striving against it. By definition, you haven't or you'd be dead. And you've forgotten the exhortation which is addressed to you as sons.

This is now not just as children. This is those who are really taking up responsibility to manage what the Lord entrusts to them, what the Father entrusts to them, to manage it according to the Father's will.

**"My son, do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord."** Now, it's discipline, it's training. We are conditioned to think of innocent discipline as punishment. And it may mean that, and it does include that, as we'll see in a moment. But the point is, it's training. And this is the term that was used by the Greek philosophers to describe the training of children. In fact, this training was the essence of growing to maturity in the Greek society and culture.

**"Nor faint when you're approved by him."** So when he demonstrates to you that something that you thought was the way things should be is wrong, when he confronts you with a need to recognize that what you were looking to for success results actually in failure, and you need to change what you're striving after.

**"For those the Lord loves, he disciplines, he trains, and he scourges every son he receives."** So the punishment element is in there. And the term, as it was used in the Greek society, is training a child who needs to be shown occasionally because he can't understand the issue involved, needs to be shown that what he is bent on is actually hurtful. And the only way he can be shown that, because he can't see the cause and effect, is like being taught not to run out into the street chasing your ball.

You can't let the child learn the hard way about not running in front of a car or putting his hand on a hot stove. You have to discourage him because he's not able to learn the higher principle properly. But he has to be protected from his natural folly.

**Now it is for discipline**, it's for training **that you endure**. God deals with you as with sons. **What son is there whose father does not discipline**, does not train? Some say "wait a minute! My father didn't discipline me. He was not a disciplinarian and he was kind of passive". But this is not what it's talking about. I'll continue on a little more: "If you're without discipline, of which all have become partakers, then you're illegitimate children and not sons**. Because the point is to be trained up to godly maturity.

Verse 9: **"Furthermore, we had earthly fathers to train us, and we respected them."** Now, again, people object to this and say, "well, I didn't respect my father. He was kind of a miserable character". But that's not what we're talking about. The term here that gets translated as "respected" really means we capitulated. We caved in. When you're little, you don't have a choice. The parents' authority will be enforced. They have the ability to enforce it beyond your ability to resist. That's what it's talking about.

**"Shall we not much rather be subject to the Father of spirits and live?"** The issue here is real life, not just the earthly issues of life. **"For they discipline, trained us for a short time as seemed best to them. But He for good, that we may share His holiness."**

Every father, regardless of his manner of doing so, is determined to teach his children what the father is convinced is essential for life. That's by definition.

We've even had fathers—we had one grad student father who would pick up his little son and then drop him and then say, "See, never trust anyone." To him, that was the most important thing he could teach his son. It was tragic. It doesn't say that this grad student arrived at Stanford and that upbringing really had a terrible effect on him—fear of trusting anyone about anything. We watched the Lord redeem that beautifully.

The point here is the earthly father. This is contrasting the Lord's training us for sonship with human fathers or parents training us for maturity. He is saying that there was basic training that we needed to receive from human parents. At the very least, it was to learn to cooperate with authority.

You cannot hold a job. You cannot do anything in society if you haven't learned to cooperate with authority. We have several Stanford students who are now living on the street because they're using their Stanford degree to flunk out, to resist, and because human society and economy—they're determined not to be under any authority instead of learning to welcome it, even though it's not perfect, and learning to trust people who are imperfect, to cooperate with their leadership. Short, of course, of disobeying God in the process. But here he's contrasting what we all received growing up to some degree or other with what he's doing in training us. Because if you look at what he is seeking to accomplish, he says, "Shall we not rather be subject to the Father of spirits and live," verse nine? And that he disciplines us for our good, that we may share his holiness, share his character. And then verse 11, which we'll get to in a minute, the peaceful fruit of righteousness.

As I look at the goal of what the Lord is intending to accomplish through this training process, it helps me to understand it and welcome it and go with it instead of fight it, which we all tend to do.

The flesh in every one of us is allergic to authority. It's how we're born. I want to be independent. I want to decide things myself, go where I want to go when I want to go. We all know innately I'm born to rule. And actually, that's true.

You see it in two year olds! God created us in His image and commissioned us to rule in His likeness. To manage the affairs of life the way He does. And yeah, we're born to rule, but we have to learn how to do it the right way. And that's what we naturally leave out. I don't need to learn it. I know I'm supposed to be in charge, so I'll just do it.

It helps us a lot. This is how to recognize the encumbrances, how to catch the sin that so easily entangles us so that we can run that race with endurance, understand that we're in training, understand that He's training us so that we share His holiness. So we share His strong, beautiful character and make it visible in us.

It takes training and it's a long haul race, but it is so worth it in terms of what He produces, not just at the end, but along the way.

They trained us, disciplined us, trained us for a short time as seemed best to them. And by the way, that's where I struggled. I got along basically fine with my father growing up. It wasn't an issue. I had the benefit of having come to know God as my Heavenly Father, as a lot of you know, when I was three or four. I just devoured the Bible. I was impressed with the fact that God said it was to obey my parents. So I did. I was very peaceful with that because I knew it was the right thing. And it saved me a lot of trouble that my brothers had to go through.

Even though I had a good relationship with my father, I was struggling as I was really starting to grow into maturity in my walk with the Lord. I was struggling with, Lord, how am I to view this man? He's not a believer. So, you know, how am I to view him? And he took me to this passage. He said that they disciplined, trained us for a short time as seemed best to them. I said, oh, then by definition, my father did what you intended him to do. And every father does. Every father seeks to function as a father the way that seems best to them. It's a no-brainer.

It doesn't mean that everything they did was good. No, it doesn't mean that everything they did was right. But God's purpose of placing a father in my life, same as in every other person's life, is to confront me with the authority of somebody who, at least to a significant degree, doesn't see things the way I do. And I'm supposed to honor that.

But the question is not whether he's right. The question is whether he's doing what God's purpose for placing him in my life was. And by that, by definition, he was.

This has helped a lot of people to come to peace about difficult regards for parents, especially fathers, who can be anything from mildly disappointing to exceedingly distressful and horrible. But we have seen healing in a lot of people's lives as they come to welcome what the Lord was intending to do through those parents.

They did the best they knew how. It was flawed. They learned from their parents who learned from their parents. And you can go on back and back. No perfect parent, but they did the best they knew how. So thank you, Lord, for that.

It's between them and the Lord about what they did. Some of the people that we've helped, their fathers were terrible, just horrendous. But even there, that contrast was part of what led them to their Heavenly Father.

Every father helps every child to get to understand God the Father in two ways. The things that they did that were godly was a very encouraging model and seeing the goodness of the Lord. And the things that they did that were ungodly, even extremely so, made us aware that God must not be like this. The true loving God would not be like this. And so one way or the other, by positive example or negative example, it helped direct us to the nature of the true God.

Now, "all training for the moment seems not to be joyful", but this translation says "sorrowful". It's literally "painful". **"All training seems not to be joyful, but painful."** True of athletic training.

There were times in some of my worst races where I got too caught up in the fact that this is not fun. This hurts. And why am I doing this? My body was screaming at me, why are you doing this to me?

Because I wanted to be trained by it. But there was no guarantee that I would become great, and I didn't. But it was a very formative experience for me.

Therefore, the whole point is to be trained in righteousness. And the fruit of righteousness is really wonderful. The more we become more like the Lord in practice and in outlook, the way we view things, the more peaceful it is and the more wonderful the fruit. And this has been helpful to us that the training will feel painful at times. But afterwards, to those who've been trained by it, it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness.

What we have learned is when pain hits, I understand what's happening. It's training time. I welcome it. Help me to learn as much as I can. I don't want to go back through this again. So I want to learn as much as I can instead of just trying to cope and get through it. Lord, help me to grow as much as I can out of this pain.

I have tasted enough of the peaceful fruit of righteousness on the other side that I know it's worth it. I see Steve growing and working through things. I know it's worth it with the man of God that I get to live with in practice more and more. It becomes testimony to everybody and encouragement to everybody around.

Instead of saying, I hate pain. I just want to be comfy and happy. I hate this process. Instead, Lord, help me to grow as much as I can through this. Anything you want to point out, I'm here to go for it. It's my growth. It's not looking at Steve's growth. It's: I get to pursue this with the Lord. How do I grow so that I show You forth more and more?

We have tasted enough of what the Lord produces through it. **"Shall we not rather be subject to the spirit of the Lord of Spirits and live?"** It is for our good, not just medicinal good. It is good for you, but it is really good in sharing in His holiness. It is really worth it.

The peaceful fruit of righteousness. That is what the Lord is training us up for. I want to welcome it instead of fight the process. It helps so much to understand what's going on so I can cooperate instead of fight it, which we tend to do otherwise.

An example, but on the natural level. At the same time that I was running competitively, the American legend runner, Steve Prefontaine, was competing. There is no comparison between his performance and mine. There is no evidence of him being in a relationship with the Lord, though who knows? I may meet him again at the marriage supper of the Lamb. But it was a very interesting statement he made. He did have exceptional physical capabilities. His VO2 max, the amount of oxygen that he could take in in breathing was extremely unusual. That certainly helps running because it takes a lot of oxygen consumption to do that level of exercise.

But he insisted, "It's not that I am more talented. It's just that I'm more willing to suffer." And he was.

Why did he do it? The peaceful fruit of attaining to his goal, which was not righteousness. It was a spectacular running performance. I don't know where he stood or stands in terms of interest in righteousness, but just the example of, he considered his objective worth the gain was worth the pain. That is important for us. And for us, what the Lord is accomplishing as we cooperate and welcome it is permanent. In John 15, "You did not choose me. I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit and that your fruit should remain." It's permanent, what the Lord is accomplishing in us. And we take it with us forever. It's permanent growth and permanent blessing.

**Therefore, strengthen the hands that are weak and the knees that are feeble and make straight paths for your feet.**

What about you? Where are you going? Because that affects your performance, too. You do have to monitor what external influences you are and are not subject to. You have a certain amount of choice in that. There are things you do not have a choice about, but there's a lot you do have a choice about. Make straight paths for your feet. Straight with reference, of course, to the Lord's calling. So that whatever is lame may not be put out of joint, be made worse, but rather be healed.

And then the application: pursue peace with all men and the sanctification, the becoming holy in practice, "without which no one will see the Lord."

He here. We see Him. We are able to recognize Him for who He is, for what He is, the more we come to be like Him.

And there's the wonderful statement that in 1 John 3:2

**"Beloved, now we are children of God, and it has not appeared as yet what we shall be. We know that when He appears, we shall be like Him, because we shall see Him just as He is."**

As we grow more clearly, we see Him; the more we know what to aim for, and the more we succeed in that, the better we're able to see it, and others can as well.

People who have participated significantly in a sport understand what's going on when they observe that sport much better than people who don't.

Now here's the key, where is the big hang-up: **see to it that no one comes short of the grace of God.**

Romans 3:23, notes that all sin and fall short of the grace of God. Sinning is going off course. It's deviating from the target that you're aimed at.

But it's not just that our aim is bad or that we are like a bent arrow that doesn't fly straight. It's we don't even carry far enough to get to the target, no matter how well or poorly we're aimed. We just don't get there.

The target is showing forth the way.

**"See to it that no one comes short of the grace of God, that no root of bitterness springing up causes trouble, and by it many be defiled."**

There is no question here about the root of bitterness existing. It's there. And not even a question about whether it will spring up. The rootstock will continue to put out shoots. Not all plants do that. There are some trees you cut down, and it's over and done with. There are other trees that you can cut down and keep putting up shoots, and you'll spend half of your life trying to get rid of that tree of heaven, so-called, because some people think it's the most wonderful incense smell in the world.

I happen to be of the utter opinion that the smell makes me sick. But you can't get rid of it.

It makes it difficult for me to breathe when I'm exposed to it.

It will keep springing up and defile many people, like those of us who are allergic to the smell.

We went through a season where, I don't know where they came from, but they started springing up all over this place.

There's no question that the root is there. And it will put up shoots.

Bitterness is a root that does keep putting up shoots. It's determined to thrive, even though it is deathly.

There'd be no immoral or godless person like Esau.

It's not talking about sexual immorality. It's talking about being immoral relative to the Lord.

Like Esau, who sold his own birthright for a meal.

He had the same opportunity. His birthright was to be firstborn.

People think, "Well, that's great. You divide the father's assets into the number of sons plus one. And the daughters aren't left out because the son received the inheritance, which is to be used for the man and his wife and children."

So it's an equitable distribution. But the firstborn gets two of those portions, and that doesn't seem fair. Why? Just because he was born first?

With that birthright comes responsibility, including when you're looking at the monetary aspect of the birthright. The firstborn was responsible for the care of his whole generation.

Which means that if somebody, in spite of having a Stanford degree, is out on the street, guess whose responsibility, if it's one of your brothers, guess whose responsibility it is to take care of him.

So it's not all just selfish, wonderful stuff. And he's supposed to lead.

If he leads his peers well, there will be less need for him to fill in for those who are stumbling along and becoming selfish, a drag and a drain on the rest of the family.

But Esau did not want the responsibility. He wanted the goodies.

Then afterwards, he decided to inherit the blessing, not the firstborn, not the prerogatives and the responsibility. But he wanted the goodies.

He was rejected. They found no place for repentance.

He didn't want to change his convictions or his approach to life. He just wanted to get the goodies anyway.

And so, though he sought for it with tears, what he sought for was not repentance. If he sought for repentance, that would have meant he wanted to repent. And so that in itself is repentance. What he sought for with tears was the blessing. As we read the account, that's explicitly clear in Genesis. "Father, Father, don't you have a blessing for me too?" It was all about the blessing and nothing else. He had gone out hunting; he was a hunter, but he hadn't gotten anything. He came in very dramatic about it. He acted like he was going to die momentarily, and it may have felt like that, but that was not actually the case.

His brother had cooked up some lentil stew, red lentils, and Esau's statement to Jacob was "that red to this red". He was called Edom, which means red. It's the same root as Adam because he was redhead, and he was a pretty character from head to toe. That red, this red. Very articulate.

Jacob, conniving like he always was, a rip-off artist from the get-go, used the opportunity to get what he sought to renounce: his birthright. He said, "What good's birthright to me? I'm about to die." He ate some of the stew, and the text says he ate, got up, went. The birthright meant nothing to him. Three words. He arose, blitzed out of here.

The point is that the blessing and the responsibility go together. It is our responsibility to respond to the awesome offer that the Lord is giving us of being trained up in His likeness, in practice, and not just in potential. And to take real responsibility, which includes responsibility for others, to impart the Lord's blessings to them.

The point here about bitterness is really important because he's saying that in every one of us, there's a root ball of bitterness down there. It's in the flesh. Any time things don't go the way I was counting on them going, that root ball in the flesh is going to send up growth to try to take over. It shouldn't be this way. That person should never. They always, they never. The entire focus is just resentment, bitterness. The Lord is nowhere in the picture unless I'm just complaining to Him too, because you can't complain about a person without complaining to the Lord.

Like Adam in Genesis 3, "The woman You gave me." There are only two others to blame, and he gets them both. Notice the essence of what happened in Genesis 3: the result is the name of the game is blame. Pass it on. And that's the way it goes. Bitterness comes from collecting and treasuring up the perceptions of the wrongs of others. There is a certain sense of pleasure and relief that comes because we are all constantly aware of our faults. It seems to make us feel better by seeing, "Well, I'm not the only one and I'm not the worst." But that doesn't really do anything to solve the problem. It is just a way of trying to sidestep the impetus to do something about what I can do something about. That is my life. But I cannot do that apart from the Lord. I need Him to make it happen.

The bitterness is really saying, "I just don't like life the way it's coming to me. I don't like what the people are doing. I don't like what You are doing, Lord." It causes us to **fall short of the grace of God**. We cannot experience His favor. We have it, but we don't benefit from it as long as we're saying, "Lord, I don't like life the way it's coming. I don't like what other people are doing." The focus is just, no, I don't like it.

One person has said, "Bitterness is like drinking poison and sincerely hoping that it will cause someone else to die from it." But in fact, I am the one that is dying from it because I am harboring anger and saying this person should never. The whole focus is on what is wrong with others, what is wrong with circumstances, and what is wrong with God. I'm not going to experience His favor as long as that's my focus.

One thing that bitterness does—and don't misunderstand this, I'll qualify it in a moment—is it stimulates autoimmune reactions. It really is. Drinking poison does. In the hopes that by doing so, I will cause somebody else to die. Actually, even in terms of your physical health, it has a death-producing effect in you.

Now, do not make the mistake of assuming that everybody you meet who is the victim of autoimmune disease is bitter, and this is God's punishment for them for their bitterness. We don't believe that, and that is not what we are saying. What we are harboring inside ends up having physical manifestations as well as everything else. And that's true of all sorts of ungodly things. They do affect our bodies.

It has been really helpful for us to realize that any time things do not go the way I wanted them to go, I have two choices. Either I can focus on that and get bitter, anger gone underground and long-term, or I can thank the Lord, not because it's necessarily good, but because the Lord is here to redeem. So "Thank you, Lord, for this. How can I join You in a redemptive approach to what isn't good?" Then I am actually doing something positive instead of just adding to the problems by grumping, by coddling how wrong it was, how hurt I am, how helpless I am, which none of us are. I always have agency to turn to the Lord and be redemptive. And so I am never helpless, no matter what others are doing.

It's "Lord, how can I grow, how can I use this as Your training for sonship? How can I show You forth in a bad situation so that You can work powerfully through my cooperation with You? How can I grow?" That is always open to me instead of just getting bitter and staying there in a little puddle of bitterness.

I have worked with people who are bitter and watched them recognize that this is actually killing them and it does defile many because bitterness—it's hard to be around a bitter person, it just is contagious and it turns everything gray.

I remember somebody at a women's retreat who had been through a horrendous marriage with physical violence and everything else. It was just very bad. She was bitter, very bitter. And she'd carried it for about 40 years. She was just bent over and bitter. She was somebody's mom who had come to the retreat.

We ended up in the small group talking about this and about the act of forgiving, of praying for those who hurt you, of taking redemptive action, of finding my life in the Lord, not in what someone did or didn't do. She acted on it after 40 years. The next morning she came in and she was standing tall and there was a light in her face. She had done business with the Lord and she was clear.

Yes, she would need to stay alert to that lurking back into her thinking and keep eradicating it. But I have learned that root ball is down there. So anytime things don't go the way I was counting on them going, I want to be quick to recognize anytime bitterness is raising up and cut it off. Lord, I want no part of this. There is only death down that road for me and for others.

And so I renounce it and pray, "thank You for this. This is a place where I get to trust You to be redemptive instead of to pray for those who've hurt me, to forgive, to see what I can do to bring the Lord's presence to a bad situation". Then I have joy and others get to see the Lord.

I had a pastor friend who liked to say that the difference between better and bitter is whether I inject I into the picture, substitute I, focus on I. Falling short of the grace of God.

Just one last note here: The grace of God. This is not talking about receiving God's favor. It is falling short of God's purpose in grace. We all know the objection to grace is, "Well, that's just going to let them do it all the more." Yes, it does. But by letting them choose to do it more, we also set them free to choose to change. And the falling short of the grace of God means that God has given me the freedom not to be battling against condemnation, but to accept loving rebuke, to allow myself to be corrected because there isn't the stigma of caving in and being branded evil. It sets me free, not just to continue in the old way, but it sets me free to change.

To come short of the grace of God means I don't let God's gift of His favor result in my being changed for the better. But the encouragement here is to go for it. Not to pull short, but to carry through by cooperating with God's purpose and giving me His favor.

We decided we needed to cover this, especially since next week is Thanksgiving and we're not going to continue in Hebrews the next quarter. At some point, we will come back to Hebrews 3 and 4 to look at it as the amazing model in Scripture of how to open up a passage of Scripture to another person.

Let's pray.

> Lord, thank You that You are our heavenly Father. And thank You for the race that's set before us. May we run it with endurance by gluing our eyes on You, the forerunner, and welcoming all the growth, not fighting You on it, but welcoming it proactively, learning as much as we can from You with every situation, not letting what others are doing stop us doing or not doing, but looking to You to keep us growing as fast as we can so that we make You visible in this world through us.
>
> Thank You for the high calling that You've given us. And may we welcome that, embrace that, and run with it, run with You with it. Thank You, Lord, for each one here. Please greatly encourage each one in their race set before them. And may they walk in a Thanksgiving filled with great Thanksgiving and celebrate Your birth with Christmas with a full heart and bringing Your presence to the people of their lives.
>
> Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.