> Oh, Lord Jesus, thank you that you see us. You see us through and through, and seeing everything, you love us more than we can possibly grasp. Thank you that you are our living God and that we have the privilege of walking with you and more than just with you, you and us and we in you.

> Thank you for not only going to the cross to open the way so we could be yours, but also filling us with your own life by the Holy Spirit.

> Lord, may all of us be encouraged to lay hold of more of what you've given us and to walk in active fellowship with you and to hear you and to be equipped to help others.

> Thank you, Lord, for each one here, now so loved, known by you. Be at work among us, open our ears to hear what's especially for each one of us, both for our own lives and for others. And may we receive it and walk in it.

> Thank you, Lord, for these rich texts that speak here from you to us in all ages. Thank you, Lord, in your name.
> Amen.

Welcome. It's so good to see you. We're continuing on in Hebrews because there's much for us to learn about how to actually receive and walk in the promises of God. And as we learn that for ourselves, then we're being equipped to help others as well. And part of what we've been looking at is what is it that opens our ears to hear Him and what closes our ears? And how do we get from hearing to really take internalizing and walking in the truth? As we do that, we're equipped to help others.

Tonight we'll be continuing on, especially looking at how the Lord enables us to do that, to take it in and walk in it.

Hebrews was addressed to believers or some who were perhaps not believers but had seemed to head toward the Lord, who were reverting to their Jewish faith and especially all the rites and rituals.

It is very easy to do that, especially as you get older and especially if you're getting pressure from people around you. They were in small communities of Jews and proselytes that were spread through the Roman Empire, and they tended, since they were scattered, to want to stay together.

And then if you became a believer, you were ostracized and under pressure from your community.

For various reasons, the writer of Hebrews was aware that they were reverting. Oftentimes it's to make sure my bases are covered.

We see this with people out of the Catholic tradition, Mormonism, and so on, who may have actually come to the Lord but then start reverting because they get fearful that they're not covering all the bases with God.

There are quite a few in-depth passages here addressing what was provided in the old, the old covenant through Moses, and what we now have available through Jesus.

There is a lot of detail that we're not going to go into. We're focusing. We will be doing what we normally don't do. We will not be going verse by verse, but in small sections and leave it to you to have the fun, if you want to, of going back into looking up what all of that old, what was part of the old covenant through Moses, and it makes a wonderful study. Steve has done it in depth, as you could imagine, and in detail, going back with all the cross-references.

If you're not wanting to go in that much detail, you can get a good commentary that will help you do that. But we're going to focus especially on the interspersed passages that apply always and apply to us.

Come back just momentarily to the calling at the beginning of Hebrews 2, the first four verses.

**"For this reason, because of the superiority of Jesus as the apostle of faith, God's ambassador to us, that superiority to all of the revelation in the Old Testament through the prophets, and as the—**

Because of that superiority, we get this encouragement, exhortation, warning.

**For this reason, we are to pay much closer attention to what we're hearing, lest we drift on by. For if the word being spoken by angels was demonstrated to be firm and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense, how shall we escape while being unconcerned about salvation**, which was first given to be spoken through the Lord, then confirmed to us by those hearing, that is, hearing Him speak it firsthand, God bearing witness with them, both by signs and by wonders, by various miracles, that is, works of divine power, distributions, that is, gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to His own will.

The concern here is about not being apathetic. And in fact, in evangelism and pastoring a congregation, the concern is apathy.

The person who's arguing hard against the gospel has more hope than the person who just shrugs and turns elsewhere because the one who is fighting feels threatened by the message. That one is actually interacting with the message.

The important thing here is that we don't just listen to the word and say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah," and maybe agree and maybe feel the fascinating insights there but not recognizing its message for us about how to draw into close relationship with the Lord.

It is easy to do that, especially if you've been a believer for a while. You hear truth from Scripture, and we're more often than not just checking off, "Oh, yeah, I recognize that. Do I agree with it? Yeah, I agree with it." But it just stays in the intellect and it doesn't change us.

His encouragement is not to just drift on by, hear a sermon and, "Yep, I think it was a good sermon because I agree with it." It is easy to do that and stop at that point, just maybe a little more theology, some points I agree with, and then it's forgotten.

And so he's saying, these are words of life. These are the words from God Himself. So don't just let it drift on by and neglect it instead of realizing I want and need to listen to this and internalize it, which is where He is going.

We are in Hebrews 2:15 that He is to cancel the power of death through the fear of death. Hebrews 2:15 might release all those who, because of the fear of death, were held fast in slavery all their lives.

We get to the quotations from Psalm 95. We will return to that later, possibly even next week. It is very easy to say, "Yeah, I agree theologically," but be so caught in fear from things from the past that I don't—I feel like I can't respond.

We will get into more of that in the future. These are key verses that I want to come back to, to apply much more.

The warning, the exhortation from Psalm 95, from the Holy Spirit inspiring the Old Testament writings here: "Today, if you hear His voice, do not harden your hearts as in the provocation during the day of trial in the wilderness." And then a bit from Hebrews 3:12 and 13: "See, brethren, lest there be in any one of you an evil, unbelieving heart, which falls away from the living God. But encourage one another throughout each day, as long as it's still called today, in order that no one among you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin."

As long as it's called today, as long as the Lord is speaking to us from His word.

Being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin means that the appearance of life in that which is apart from God and contrary to God and His nature and His calling to us and His desire for us.

The more we turn away from what God says because of finding things that are contrary to His character, His word, His life attractive, the harder it is to hear Him.

In contrast to that, verse 4:3, we, the believing ones, enter His rest. That is, those who are actively believing, actively trusting God and His word in practice.

That's the key.

And of course, "do you believe in God?" Well, according to the polls, most Americans—we haven't seen recent polls, but it tended to run about 90%—say they believe in God. What they mean is they believe that there is such a thing as a God. That's not biblical belief, which is trust.

The reason this is so important is what we come to in chapter 4, verses 12 and 13:

"For the word of God is living and effective and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing as far as the division of soul and spirit, both joints and marrow, able to judge the intentions and thoughts of the heart. And there's no creature hidden from His sight, but all things are open and laid bare to the eyes of Him with whom we have to do."

Actually, that open, all things are naked, literally. And laid bare—that's very interesting what the role of the word is, that it's to bring us to the reality of where we stand with respect to what He's calling us to in His word. The naked's pretty clear; it goes way back to in the creation, Genesis 2, before the fall, before the introduction of sin, that everything was exposed. There was no stigma to being naked because there was no reason to question anything or to imagine anything negative coming from being observed exactly as I am.

The lead bearer is very interesting. And we said this, the image—as it comes from etymologically, it comes from the word for throat. And so it's bearing the throat. Now we see that on the natural level in the animal kingdom, if two animals are fighting, and one decides to give up, it will bear his throat, throw his head back, expose the throat, which communicates, "I'm vulnerable. I give up. You could go for my throat and kill me." The expectation is, and it's quite generally understood and accepted within the animal kingdom, that if the one who is being surrendered to does not kill the one that has made himself vulnerable, the one who has given up will get up and leave, and that's the end of it. It does not end in taking advantage of that gesture of total vulnerability. And that's the confidence on both ends, and it's well understood in the animal kingdom.

Now, there are a couple of other things when we get into human. It can refer to a wrestling match, either to get a hold around the neck or to pull the opponent's head back, which is a pretty tough position to be in. Not that the wrestler who succeeds in pulling his opponent's head back is going to bite his jugular or his windpipe out.

Then there's a very interesting other way that this comes up, which is pregnant with possibility. We've all seen it portrayed, at least in movies, where somebody is being hauled in to face somebody who wants to demand some sort of an accounting, of submission. Somebody standing there, the guard places a knife or a sword under the throat, under the chin, and thereby forces the person to look up and look eye to eye with the conqueror, the one who is demanding submission.

So, what are we getting at? That God's word is designed to show us what is actually from God and what is not, but that we, because of the deceitfulness of sin, think is really light.

Between the soul and spirit, we noted that between joints and marrow refers to the ceremonial investigation of whether the supposedly blemish-free sacrificial animal is actually blemished, by doing an internal search.

For us, the issue is the difference between the soul and the spirit, what Paul will contrast as the flesh and the spirit. The question is, is this from my personal life apart from God, which is sinful? Or is this from the Spirit of God? What is going on in me? Is this aspect of my lifestyle in conformance with God and His character?

Remember, we are created in the image of God. Although all human beings by created nature reflect the image of God, true believers with the Holy Spirit within have the opportunity to radiate the glory of God.

Jesus is the radiance of God's nature, of God's glory, meaning it's an expression that comes from within. It is not an expression that comes from without and then bounces off like a mirror.

This concern is getting down to the intentions and thoughts of the heart. Remember, the heart is the seat of the will. And we get that going all the way back to the first clue we get as to the message God has written in human anatomy and physiology is that, speaking to Noah, "Now you may eat animal flesh, but not eat it with the blood." I don't think it's so much whether or not the blood—physical blood—has been drained from the carcass of the slaughtered animal so as not to eat it with the life still in it. Animals devour each other, usually without killing each other. They just attack an animal. A pack of wolves or hyenas or whatever will get an animal, will pack on one animal in the herd and just start tearing it apart and eating it right there while it stands there in shock.

I think that's God protecting the animal. It's from what we would imagine the animal, I think the animal would be thinking or experiencing, but the animal is just in shock. It appears that way anyway.

The issue is what we're really finding out is whether the intentions of the heart, the will of the individual, is actually from the Lord or not, and then what are the thoughts that arise from those intentions, and translated here—and what I just read—"you’re able to judge the intentions and thoughts of the heart." That's the order.

Translations typically say the thoughts and intentions. Now, I think the original order in the text of Hebrews is very right because it's the intentions that give rise to the thoughts.

This is the thing. This is what we should desire to get from the word: to become informed and let the declarations of God's written word affirm what is actually from the Lord that is developing in our lives or expose the delusion that something that actually is not from the Lord seems like it is.

This comes up in the immediate context before verse 9 and 10:

**"There remains therefore a Sabbath rest for the people of God, for the one who's entered his rest has himself rested from his works as God did from his."**

This has to do with resting in God. What does it mean and what does the word have to do with that? There are a lot of places where we're seeking to rest, but in fact we're trying to make life happen our way.

An example of that: we have many students who graduate who are believers and they are praying and saying, "Lord, I want to do whatever you want, whatever is your will." And struggling with that transition. "What do I do with my life now that it's not all givens and so on? I want to serve you, but hear nothing."

As they get into the word, can't tell you that Susie should do whatever it is. But again, the word does address the motivations in saying, "Lord, I want to do whatever you want." But there are always a lot of givens that aren't even as long as it's high prestige and pay, make a lot of money. And especially that's often informed from culture and parents that if we're going to make this education worthwhile, we paid how much, you need to get a job that will bring a lot of prestige and a lot of money to the family. It's family-honored.

And the word will often divide between the intent, which is, "I do want to do Your will, Lord," but show us the motivations that end up saying actually the opposite: "I want the glory."

This is actually about people when they ask, "What do you do?" "Oh, I'm in frontline A.I." "Oh," and you know that people are worshiping what you're doing. And we all like that in the flesh.

There have been times when students have realized this, gone to the Lord and said, "Lord, whatever it pays, whether it has prestige with it or not, I want to use Your gifting and Your service." And then they start getting direction.

For one, it was being a kindergarten teacher: not very much prestige in her culture, but getting to work with students entering the whole education system and the families and getting to bring the Lord together at that important point. And she loved it, absolutely loved it, and used her gifts well.

So the word divides between what is maybe good intent overall, but what the underlying real motivations are, or the caveats that we all tend to have. It gets pretty scary.

And then I'm resting in the Lord. If I'm saying not just, "I want whatever You want, Your will," but from the heart, according to Your word, as we sort out what the motivations are and so on, I'm resting in where You call me because I know that that's good. And I'm here to serve unto You.

And then there's real rest. It's dynamic. They're plenty active, but they have the purpose of displaying the Lord and giving glory to the Lord in what they actually devote the next decades of their lives to.

But it sounds pretty scary to be open and laid bare to Him with whom we have to do. And you're going, "Oh, I am in big trouble." And that's—

But then we get an immediate reassurance in where it goes next.

Now, and where it goes next is, oh wait a second, yeah, having a high priest, you can go into them verses 15 and 16.

So we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses. So immediately there's assurance here. It's important to let God use His word to tell us where we're on track in truly becoming living images of God Himself, accurate portrayals, accurate expressions, and where we're off base. That immediately leads to this concern. If He can see absolutely everything, I am totally exposed to Him. Where is the fig leap and the bush to hide behind? The other side of this is we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses. One has been tempted in all things as we but without sin. Jesus really was tempted in all things. We read, I believe it’s Luke’s account, about the temptations in the wilderness, where He gets through recounting them. Then it says, "and then the accuser withdrew until a more opportune time."

It wasn’t go through the 40 days in the wilderness being tempted and then it's all over now, get on with your public ministry. No, it was constant opportunities: the opposition of the religious leaders, the lack of recognition in His own family, all of the taunts from the people who were convinced that life was in things that are not pleasing to the Lord. He was tempted like none of us.

Bear in mind that He came to save us from the one who had the power of death. He came to rescue all of us who were willing to be rescued from the grip, from the control and slavery to the accuser, the evil one. He was not about to just step aside and let this happen. The evil one pulled out every stop. He pulled everything he could to try.

In Revelation, that’s described with the imagery of the dragon of old crouching before the woman about to give birth. That was true with Jesus, but it’s also, in Revelation, the emergence of the church coming forth. The evil one wants to do everything he can to block it.

Because Jesus knows what it is to be tempted, and He also knows that He had the power to resist, which we didn’t. He succeeded in resisting. He knows what it is. No matter what it is we are being tempted by, He knows what it is to be tempted by that and tempted far beyond what any of us have experienced in that area. And so he does understand our weakness, so we can have confidence to approach that.

As it says, "draw near with confidence to the throne of grace," confidence that as we approach God in His authority, we will be received with favor, even though we are guilty of the things that the Word exposes to view and recognition, and that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.

Grace is favor and freely given, but mercy is meeting our need—that we will receive the help that we need to resist the temptation, to learn to resist that temptation over time.

We come later in Hebrews to be followers of those like Abraham, who by faith and patience inherited the promises, receiving what God promises. That is our hope, how we expect to be blessed and receive life from Him and salvation in practice from the things that have gripped us. That it takes time. And God is faithful. He does fulfill all of His promises. But it takes time. Not because of God, but because of what He has to work in us, and the process of bringing us out from under the ungodly things into the truly godly things takes time because He’s not about to just crush us, but He takes us at a pace where we are convinced to trust Him and move ahead bit by bit, a little more in this area, a little more in another area, coming back to that first area, a little more than that.

He understands that. That is essential to how we are having confidence to approach it.

This is really key in ministry, as well as for our own lives, because there are so many believers who hate themselves, who know about what they’ve done, what they’ve thought, and they cannot believe that God actually loves them. I was that way for 20 years into our ministry. I taught about God’s love and forgiveness, but I didn’t believe it for myself. I finally realized I was calling God a liar. If You say You love me and welcome me and accept me, then You do. I’m sorry about calling You a liar, but that’s when I really took it from my theology down. I internalized it. I welcomed it as true for me. It was after that that my growth really took off.

It’s Colossians 1, where He’s the Lord. Paul is talking about the growth and documentation of their growth in the love for believers, faith, hope, love. Once you understood the grace of God in truth, and that’s the key. Once I’ve gone from talking about it to really welcoming it as true, then I’m free to grow. Because then where the word is pointing things out, it’s not, “Oh boy, one more reason I’m condemned back to law. I am my track record.”

The word instead is this is an opportunity to grow. This is a place to move forward because I’m under God’s grace. I have His favor.

As He’s pointing things out, this is an invitation into more life, more resting in Him rather than one more reason why He’s mad at me. Those who feel God is mad at them hide out and stop listening to the word. Those who realize this is an invitation more into more life, then you want to hear and welcome it. Then you realize it’s good news, not bad news.

We look at the example of Jesus. By the way, these extended sections in Hebrews are comparing and showing the superiority of Jesus to the old covenant, to the order under the Mosaic law in every regard. We don’t need all of that detailed discussion. It’s fascinating, but it’s not central to where we are now as believers under the new covenant. It provides a wonderful foundation, but it’s not essential to our going ahead. So we’re not going to go into any of that in detail. We will highlight as we move ahead here. First thing is the six, the priest forever. He doesn't just have a term of office as the high priest. Remember, if the apostle and high priest of our confession, the apostle is the messenger from God to the believers. The priest is the representative from the believers to God. And so he bridges between us and our Heavenly Father in both directions. That is a permanent position that he's in. He will never be unavailable to us in either of those roles.

We look at Jesus in Hebrews 5:7-9. **"In the days of his flesh, he offered up both prayers and supplications with loud crying and tears to the one able to save him from death."** He was living a life depending on God to give him the power and sustain him and give him the focus to obey in spite of all of the opposition and counter arguments and all of the appearances of life and things that are not godly and all of the people trying to constantly talk him into what they thought was life that really was not.

God is Heavenly Father, and God in His word says is not. The problem with all the people who did not respond to his message, he had the perspective to say often when he was teaching, "Let him who has ears to hear, let him hear." He didn't try to reach everyone. He gave everyone the opportunity by teaching all who would listen, but he knew only some would respond.

That's the way God calls us. We imagine that when we talk about God choosing us, that that's unilateral. No, God calls to everyone. Those who respond then are called out by that message. This is how our relationship with Him is free will in both directions. Otherwise, we would be at first like the animals and at best like the angels, the loyal angels who always do God's will, but they have no choice. That's just their nature. We have the opportunity to do that with total free will, which allows us to be His allies and not just His servants or slaves.

Jesus went through it all. He learned obedience, verse 8. "He learned obedience from the things which he suffered." What do we mean he learned obedience? He learned obedience in principle. He did learn to obey specific things, but that's not the point here. He learned to choose that which God, His Heavenly Father, called him to and His written word called him to by choosing that as free will. He learned it from the things which he suffered. He learned it by living with and resisting all the pressure to do otherwise, the temptations from appearances and the temptations to give in to all of the taunts and so forth. And that was true throughout His life. It was also true at the ultimate, the sacrificial love, the ultimate sacrificial love of His going to the cross for us. Because what was happening? First of all, He was giving up His human life, which had the capability of doing greater things than any other human being had ever done. He was giving up life. His life was not taken away from Him. He said, "My life is not taken away from me. I lay it down myself."

But the thing was, he not only suffered giving that up, which is parallel to what we suffer, but we suffered the giving up of things that aren't really life, but we have come to be convinced are, which makes it really hard for us. But also, he was looking at the evidence that was not there. What did He accomplish? Could it possibly be the Father's will that He step out at this point?

After all, the disciples have just been arguing over who's the greatest. And he calls them "you little faiths. You are so minute in your trust." And the Father is calling Him to cease His input into these guys and trust the Father that they would be able to take over the propagation of the good news of new life?

All the appearances were, "no way!" But Jesus had not been able to see the transformation the Holy Spirit would make in their lives once the Spirit came in. The Spirit could not come until Jesus went.

**"And having been made perfect,"** we translated perfect or mature, and actually it is, He was made perfectly mature. **He became to all those who obey Him**, all who would trust Him because of trusting Him, **the source of eternal salvation.**

As we have come to trust Him, then as we live that out in practice regarding specific issues, we become saved in practice, what we call sanctification, what we save from the practice of sin progressively.

Remember the note with Abraham: "Through faith and patience." It takes time. It takes a lifetime. In fact, we will never get to the bottom of God's punch list for us, no matter how long we live, though we can see tremendous progress.

Fortunately, God does not let us live here forever, still working on trying to triumph over more and more of the flesh.

I was thinking of the example which you lived out, and we did too, of caring for aged parents. At times, there is a lot of what Steve calls a burdensome privilege: one that you will treasure all your life.

It's not easy. It takes a lot of trusting the Lord to give up in order to give. I was really watching Steve as he cared for his almost 95-year-old father and supporting him every way he could. But I watched the Lord hone the Lord's beautiful character much more in Steve, as he trusted the Lord to sacrificially pour into his dad's life. He took a whole day a week in this case, because he was up in San Francisco at a skilled nursing facility to help him with everything from getting to go to the bathroom by himself instead of having the grampers on and so on.

It was just a big deal. It was laborious. It was hard. But I watched the Lord hone Steve, mature him, in the Lord's beautiful character as he trusted the Lord to do this. And that's true of you too.

It's a wonderful example of how the Lord uses those sacrificial pouring out long times, which we all do with different people. He uses it to teach us to rest more deeply, much more deeply in Him, as we make the choices to trust Him to do it as He calls us to and give us the life to do it.

And then He's honing His beautiful character in us as we do it.

Now, then we have an appeal. We have much to say about Jesus. Hard to explain since you've become dull of hearing. So by this time, you ought to be teachers. Teachers. You have need again for someone to teach you the elementary principles, the oracles of God.

You kind of need milk and not solid food. Milk starts out as solid food, but somebody else eats the solid food and digests it and makes use of it and then turns some of it into what one who can't yet do that can thrive on.

It’s the word of righteousness, God's word, that describes the new life, describes His character in practice as we learn to live that life. The babe, the one who's still hearing but has not really learned to trust, keeps having to depend on others to sustain him instead of learning to feed directly on the word of God and grow.

What characterizes that maturity is having learned through practice, baby steps first and then working on up, maybe crawling for a while, and then baby steps, and then actually being able to walk without holding on to something or falling down after three steps.

What characterizes the mature believer is one who is now discerning good and evil, not by appearances, but by the wisdom of the Word of God and by working it out in practice.

The more I receive the word and trust Him to walk in it, the more I will hear Him. If I'm just listening with adding to my theology knowledge, but without walking it out, trusting Him to walk it out, I will miss so much of what's there.

As I make it my practice to listen, because this is where life is, and this discerns where what is the good place, the good way for the long run, not just what looks good, and I trust the Lord to walk it, then I hear more and more and more. We are back in Hebrews. Steve taught this probably 50 years ago. And we're seeing so much more as we're going into it now than we did back then. It’s not just adding to the theology bank, but it's really trusting the Lord. How do I work this out in my life with the people and the circumstances that I regularly encounter?

The question came up last night with the students: what about listening to sermons? Isn't that good? The answer is yes. But then when you've listened to a sermon, I always ask the Lord for one or two points, because I’m not going to be applying all of it. I ask, "Give me one or two points that You’re highlighting for me. Show me how to walk it out."

I will go back to that passage the next day and spend more time in the passage that was being taught from, asking the Lord to speak more. "Reveal Yourself more, help me to see You better". I’m praying that passage back to the Lord. So I'm interacting with Him about it instead of just, yeah, yeah, yeah. This is great. I agree with it and leaving it there.

This is interacting with Him about it through the passage. Who you are, who I am now because of Your Spirit within. How can I walk this out? Show me of the regular occurrences, the regular people that I interact with, the regular circumstances I have to deal with—thinking and applying it ahead—how do I walk this out, Lord? Then I give myself to Him to do it.

And then you're really growing and partnering with the Lord. You will experience Him changing your approach as you do that, and then it becomes the way we do it together. Much more, it's always trusting Him. It’s not just, "Okay, I’ve changed my behavior," but what’s changed is my habit of trusting Him and walking according to what He’s just shown me.

The combination: yes, listen to good teaching, read good teaching, but don’t leave it there. Go back to the passage, let the Lord speak deeper. Pray it back to Him. Pray, "How do I walk this out?" Then you’re really making it part of who you are now in practice. And you'll hear more and more as you do it. That’s the path to maturity He’s pointing out.

The first half of chapter six talks about the danger of being involved in Christian activities, Christian fellowship stuff only vicariously, only through others. The danger is people who...

You ask people, "Do you want to go to heaven?" Some are not sure whether there is such a thing, but most will say yes. If there isn’t a heaven, then I don’t lose anything by saying "yes, I'm interested". But what are they imagining? A big party in the sky. But when you find out what it's all about—and that's what this is talking about—when you find out what it's all about, if your conclusion is this isn't what I signed up for, and then you reject it, then now that you're really informed about what becoming a Christian, what inviting Jesus into your life is all about, and you say, no, you never were a believer. And you were attracted to something that you didn't understand and you liked it superficially.

Now that also may be somebody who never was a believer, but they may come to true belief yet, and we've seen people who do that. So, and what's the real test?

In verses 7 and 8 of chapter 6, we get it down to the image of, well, what fruit results? You know, using the image of ground, how do you know what seed is there and what seed has actually taken hold? Well, you water the ground, see what springs up. And yeah, there may be a lot of the old. But is there any of the new?

And he said, you know, if it yields thorns and thistles, well, that's a reference back to Genesis 3, that when you try to do life apart from Me, that's what you're going to get. You're not going to get good fruit. You're going to get thorns and thistles.

And so if the only thing that results, the only thing that develops in your life is more of what characterizes you—the fall characterizes sin—then there's no evidence that there's genuine faith, that you're actually trusting God for what He offers.

But then a beautiful thing about Hebrews is there are a lot of warning passages in here. But every one is followed by a reassurance passage.

Verse 9: **"But beloved, we are convinced of better things concerning you, things that accompany salvation, though we are speaking this way. But God is not unjust so as to forget your work, the love which you have shown toward His name and having ministered** and still ministering **to the saints."**

"We desire that each one of you show the same diligence so as to realize the full assurance of hope until the end." This is going all the way back to what we were talking about at the beginning of Hebrews. The full assurance of hope. The hope of new life. Of the real thing. Until the end.

As we pointed out, that's not the end of a time sequence. That's the goal. The objective of coming to put your hope in Christ is that you may not be sluggish, (verse 12) but imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises. There are times when all of us need the assurance of other believers who look into our lives because our lives are lived on such a daily basis. It's easy not to see the growth because we're on the cutting edge of growth where we are now. But we've had people who were so discouraged by some repeated sin that has shown up in their lives, and they begin to wonder, am I even a believer?

It's so good, especially if we know them and we've known them for a while, to be able to say, we've seen the long-term fruit. Yes, you stumbled and sprawled flat just now, but we have seen that long-term growth. We will give specifics, and it is such encouragement forward. That's part of why you want to be in fellowship, long-term fellowship with people where we can encourage one another forward.

I need to see the Lord over your shoulder when I can't see it over in mine at the moment. We all need that assurance of yes, but I've seen you grow in the Lord. Even though you're struggling now and may have blown it again in the same area, overall, the trend is real growth. So be encouraged.

It's by faith, by trust, and patience that we grow into maturity. I didn't get to mention at the beginning of this chapter, it's talking about not being mature, going back, really circling right at the door of, oh my gosh, I've blown it. I'm such a terrible person. God must be down on me. Grovel, grovel, grovel and hiding out from God.

We've had believers who've told us, I have asked Jesus in 10 times and He won't come in. Usually what's meant by that is He is not doing what I expected Him to do. He is not giving me the big party in the sky. It's not heaven now. You mean I have to grow and trust the Lord to work through issues? Oh, no.

But I circled for quite a while at the door just because my focus was on my performance and being a dyed-in-the-wool perfectionist in the flesh. I could see a million reasons why God shouldn't accept me because I didn't accept me, and I didn't understand the process. But He is saying, move on from that. Welcome that you stand before the throne of grace. The price is paid. You are forgiven. These are just opportunities to be trusting the Lord to move forward.

As a person really welcomes that, then they can start moving forward instead of having the focus all on my performance in the past, even if it was two seconds ago.

Hebrews 6 ends, "This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, one which enters within the veil."

The image here is in the tabernacle. There was the outer courtyard where anybody could go. Then there was the inner courtyard where only Jews could go. First was the court of the women, then the one where only men could go. Then there is the holy place where only the priest can go, and then the Holy of Holies, which is where God's presence is symbolized with the Ark of the Covenant, which contained the two tablets with the Ten Commandments, Aaron's rod which had budded, and a jar of the manna. Symbolizing God's presence and His provision, that was where the shekinah glory—the brilliant light that had no visible source, expressing God's presence in a supernatural way—was. That veil into the Holy of Holies could be passed through only on the annual Day of Atonement and only by the high priest, only carrying the basin of the blood of the sacrifice. That was to cover all the unknown sins, the ones we didn't know to confess, but just to cover everything.

Jesus did that. All of this has a corresponding reality in the heavenly dimension. Jesus entered into God's presence with His own blood, which atoned for all sin for all time. The atonement has been made, and Jesus, the one in whom we trust, is already there.

It's likened to being an anchor of a ship. If there's a storm coming, you get the ship out to where it's safe and anchor, but you have an anchor in the harbor. That's an anchor where you're parked outside of the harbor so that you have a guarantee of getting back into the harbor.

In that likeness, Jesus is already there, and He is the one who is able to pull us in regardless of the storms and so forth. This is mentioned as a strong image of hope. He will get us there, where we belong, where we're anchored, where we're going is where Jesus is, the forerunner. The veil has been torn from the top down, from heaven to earth. The way is opened by Jesus. And the anchor that will pull the ship of my life in is already there with Jesus. So it's a guarantee that I will make it through all the storms of life and more than just cope. This is strong hope so that we keep trusting Him in the midst and bearing the fruit and maturing and resting in Him.

And we're told that second, so Jesus becomes the guarantee of a better covenant. There's a new covenant, there's a new arrangement, agreement between God and us, and He being the priesthood permanently, He is always able to save forever. Verse 25: "Those who draw near to God through Him, since He always lives to make intercession for them."

Any problem we have, any concern we have about our acceptability to God, Jesus is there saying, "I paid for it. It's forgiven." Interceding for us. And we get that in Romans 8, that in our weakness, we're prayed for by the Spirit and the Son both. So that's encouraging, strong, strong intercession on our part by the Lord Himself, and we get to join in that for one another.

The oath that came after the law appoints a son made perfect forever. The main point, 8:1, and what is said is **"We have such a high priest who has taken His seat at the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens, minister in the sanctuary in the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, not man."**

So, the seat at the right hand of the throne of the Most High, the ultimate authority, is the position of executive manager, the executor of the will of the Supreme One. Jesus' job is to do the will of God. And He's taken that responsibility and that position. **Jesus, because He abides forever holds His priesthood permanently, is able to save forever those who draw near to God through Him, since He always lives to make intercession for them.**

**It is fitting that we should have such a high priest, holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners, and exalted above the heavens, who does not need daily to offer up sacrifices first for His own sins and for the people because He did this once for all when He offered up Himself. The law appoints men as high priests who are weak, but the word of the oath which came after the law appoints a Son made perfect forever.**

**Then the Lord declares, "Behold, days are coming," says the Lord**. This is in Jeremiah, speaking through the prophet Jeremiah, Jeremiah 31:33:

**"When I will effect a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not like the covenant which I made with their fathers on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, for they did not continue in my covenant, and I did not care for them," says the Lord.**

**"This is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days," says the Lord: "I will put my laws into their minds."**

The Hebrew of Jeremiah says, "I will put my law in their midst." The Septuagint translators, the Greek translators, could not understand being in the midst in any other sense than being in the mind because they were so influenced by the Greek philosophers.

**"I will put them into their minds and I will write them upon their hearts. And I will be their God and they shall be my people."**

Notice this sequence. He puts it, whether it is in their minds or just in their midst. He makes it available to them, makes them aware of it. And I'll write it upon their hearts. I'll make them aware of it. Then those who really trust Me will internalize that. They will make it their will that they are committed to. As a result of that, I will be their God, and they will be My people.

**"They shall not teach everyone his fellow citizens, and everyone his brothers, saying, 'Know the Lord,' for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest of them. For I will be merciful to their iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more."**

**When He said a new covenant, He made the first obsolete. That was becoming obsolete and growing old, is ready to disappear.**

This is how God gets His will internalized in us. It's when we not merely trust Him to do this instead of that, which is genuine faith in practice, and it's important with specific issues, but this is that "I will do God's will," because that has become my will.

This is how we get to know the Lord by embracing His will as our own and learning to live His life instead of ours, which is in contrast to His. This has been very central in our being able to trust the Lord, to live out His word, to realize that what is in my heart has already changed. The Holy Spirit is there. His will is to do the will of God. My will as a new creation at the core is to do His will. I may not be there yet in my old habits of thinking and attitudes and words and actions, but what is very helpful to realize is who I am at the core: His will is our will. It's mine as well.

Scripture really is a place to pray from. I can pray as a wife. I can go through the marriage passages. There are times where I may be struggling in practice to respect some choice that Steve has just made because it's not what I would have done. But to realize that at the core, I do respect him. I do in practice in most things. There are some places where that isn't what I would have done.

It has been very helpful to know at the core, I'm already there. Now, Lord, please work this out in practice in me so that I'm living out what's already my will because it's written on my heart. That has been so helpful because it turns all of Scripture into a place to pray from. It's already written on my heart.

I used to avoid Proverbs 31 like the plague. That woman is so amazing and just way out there in terms of maturity and influence and wisdom and all of that, not fearing the future and so on. I used to want to avoid it at all costs because I felt like I'm never going to be there. Then I realized, "Oh, it's already written on my heart." So I am there at the core, but now I get to pray from it and pray that I will be developing this in these aspects in practice by trust and patience, working it out in practice with the Lord in specific circumstances.

I have grown a lot. I've got a long way to go, but I've grown a lot in the characteristics of that amazing wise woman whose impact is good on her family and on the people around her. It also talks about assembling together and what the benefit of that is along these lines.

Then we pick up in chapter 10.

**When He comes into the world, He says, "Sacrifice and offering you have not desired, but a body you have prepared for me. In whole burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin, you've taken no pleasure. You said, 'Behold, I have come, in the roll the book is written of me, to do your will, O God. I have come to do your will.'"**

And He says, this is verse 9, **"He takes away the first in order to establish the second. By this will we've been sanctified through the offering of Jesus."**

The shift is from trying to obey the rules, which are external, to living out the new life, which has been internalized and is present spiritually by the presence of the Holy Spirit, one of the three members of the Godhead. Jesus came to show us what the Father was like. We get to do that as well. But what we're called to do now is not to keep the rules, but to please God. We don't have to worry about the rules because we are free to break the rules, but it's not beneficial. It doesn't bring us into closeness with God. What brings us into closeness with God is becoming like God in practice, in our will, and in how we live out that will.

It's very interesting, and I've puzzled over this for years. Just yesterday or the day before, it came through. In Hebrews 10:15 He says, **"The Holy Spirit also bears witness to us, for after saying, 'This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days,' says the Lord, 'I will put my laws upon their heart and upon their mind I will write them.'"**

Wait a minute. That is what we heard before. But notice the order is now reversed. We enter into the covenant by taking what we come to grasp as it is expressed to us and internalize it by embracing it as our own will. The Lord's Prayer: "Not my will, but yours be done." And it's not my separate, distinct, contrary will but Yours. Once I have internalized doing God's will as what I am determined to do and to learn how to do it in practice, then that is on my heart. That is my will. I have committed myself. I have abandoned the will of the flesh to do its own thing with my life. I have substituted and embraced the motivation in my life to do God's will.

And that's what Jesus said: "I have come to do the will of my Father." This is how we live it out—it proceeds from what we're committed to at heart to living it out in practice. **"I put my laws in their heart and their mind I'll write them,"** and verse 17, **"their sins and all their deeds I will remember no more."** It doesn't mean we're not going to sin anymore, but it doesn't matter because our motivation is to do God's will. Our practice will come in line with that as we just act on that and pursue it—not perfectly, but—

Verse 18: **"Now where there's forgiveness of these things..." There's no longer any offering for sin.**

It's not needed!

**Since therefore, brethren, we have confidence to enter the holy place by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which He inaugurated for us through the veil that is His flesh. And since we have a great high priest over the house of God, let us draw near with sincere heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water.**

**Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for He who promised is faithful. Let us consider how to stimulate one another to love and good deeds, not forsaking our own assembling together as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another all the more as you see the day drawing near.** And that's where we're going to leave it tonight. We will backtrack and review some of this because we didn't get this far last night. It's good to go back and cover that gap again because it will be superb review for us next week.

Then we will pick up several other things that we would like to see in Hebrews while we're going through this together, all with the focus of equipping us better to minister to others directly from God's word. We start by living this way, which enables us to do that.

But also, it's imperative to understand this and not just understand God's word with regard to specific issues. Because this—entering God's rest and learning to rest in the relationship I have with Him because I trust Him and I am committed and eager to do His will, to be pleasing to Him—enables me to address specific issues effectively.

We need to teach people that we're counseling about specific issues. We need to teach them how to live life on this basis, regardless of what specific issues may be in view. Let the specific issue be an example of how you did it overall.

Otherwise, you can just lapse into following the rules that are stated about dealing with anger. Or when I'm in trouble, go to that person who told me what to do instead of go to the Lord and His word.

We've several times tonight hit passages encouraging us to encourage one another to be in fellowship. It doesn't have to be a community group or fellowship group. It can be with one or two other people, but others who are pursuing the Lord on a mature basis where I can see them growing and I can hear what they're responding to in God's word and see the fruit of it.

That gives me so much vision and encouragement for my own life, and we can do it for one another. I know, and we have, and I'm sure you have seen and have people in your lives, we call them seasoned saints. People who are ahead of us who have been working this out in their lives for a long time. They really show the life of the Lord.

For me, one of them was Elaine Stedman, Ray Stedman's wife. She died at over 100. She still was this woman of wisdom from the word who just showed the Lord's presence. She was just radiant on her 100th birthday. She was. And her life was contagious because it made you want to be like her.

I remember when we had our first and I was changing diapers and wanting to be out teaching Bible studies again. I was still co-teaching with Steve, but then I was pulled back a lot from counseling and so on. I remember on the umpty zillionth diaper saying, "Lord, I would really love to be doing what I was doing before." And his question to me, who would you like to be like in about 20 years? And I thought about it and I said, well, Elaine Stedman. And he said, how do you think she got there? How many diapers do you think she changed? And she didn't have disposable. But more than that, she, I knew. Probably not even pre-folded.

Ray was teaching half of the time worldwide. She said, whenever Ray was gone, the kids or the machines or both broke down. At one year into marriage, her mom moved in, who was an incredibly difficult woman with enormous fears and very controlling because of that.

For 15 years, she was there in the home and raising four daughters with all of their ups and downs and teenage years and so on. She learned the wisdom that she lived and taught on her knees with the Word open, "just how do we handle this one, Lord? How do I show you forth here?"

And she, "by faith and patience", she learned to walk these truths. Then they were just there to share as well as to see. Even when she lost her voice toward the end, she was still ministering to people through the internet and had a huge ministry to former militant feminists who were burned out and alone as they got older. Leaders of the feminist movement.

She had an enormous ministry to a lot of those women in the end through her fingers. She was living it, sharing it, making others hungry. You could see what it looked like. That's what we can each be, forerunners. Jesus is the forerunner. Our anchor is in the harbor, already there. We will be there. We'll make it in the midst of the storms of life.

But we too, as we mature this way, we can be forerunners. We can show people—not perfectly. And it's a good thing it's not perfectly because then they'd say, "Oh, well, if I were perfect like you, no duh." But I know you're not perfect, but I still see you growing in the Lord. And that gives me courage.

It's good to see that in those who are ahead, as well as to be that for those who are coming along.

Let's pray.

> Oh, Lord, thank you that we have the joy of being Yours. And thank you that You have written Your law on our hearts, that it is at the core of who we are and what we're determined to be and how we're determined to live. May each of us keep growing as fast as we can, maturing through trusting You to walk out the truth that You’ve enabled us to hear and to see.
>
> May we not just drift on by and maybe agree with it and leave it at that, but may we instead put our anchor deep there and trust You, Lord, to walk it out. Thank You that as we do that, we'll hear You more and more and radiate You more and more. May our lives be contagious and show You forth and make others hungry to know how to do it.
>
> Encourage each one here this week, including through these words. In Your name. Amen.