> Lord Jesus, we're so thankful for the opportunity to gather together and to study Your word and gather in fellowship. Lord, we're so thankful for Your incredible love for each one of us. Lord, that You love us even before we came to You, even while we were yet sinners. And Lord, thank You that that love just continues now that we've been born again and have Your life. Thank You for the gift and the promise and commitment that You've made to each of us, that You're going to grow us up into glorifying You in practice and getting to know You so much more along the way.

> Lord, we're so thankful for that invitation and all the ways in which we've already begun to experience that. And Lord, we ask for fresh encouragement and excitement to enter into that so much more as we look into Romans tonight.

> Lord, we thank You for Your huge redeeming work out of the downward spiral and offering us a wonderful salvation by faith. Not just for the penalty of sin, but learning to trust You to walk in new life and practice. Lord, we're so thankful.

> We ask that You would enable tonight's class not to just be more head knowledge, but Lord, we ask that You'd speak upon our hearts and show us where You're calling us to walk this out and to experience You more. We pray this all in Jesus' name. Amen.

Last week we were in Romans 1 and got to look at what we call the downward spiral of humanity's rejection of God's calling for us to glorify Him. Progressively, step by step, one exchange of the reality of what the Lord has called us to, and then a consequence. God hands us over. Another rejection and another consequence. Another rejection and another consequence.

It ends up in a pretty challenging place where, as each person in one area or another, especially before we came to know the Lord, has let it run its course, we get to a place where, as Romans says, **"we no longer saw fit to acknowledge God any longer, and God gave them over to a failed mind to do those things which are not proper."**

At that point, our mind is dysfunctional. It's not properly taking into account the reality of the Lord's presence and the reality of His truth and input and invitation into real life. And we're just doing it our own way.

If we are not only saying it's not valuable, but actively rejecting and walling Him out, the function of our mind is now defective. And that's where the downward spiral ends.

But we didn't just end on a downer note. We also looked at a couple helpful things that the Lord is showing us through Paul in this downward spiral. One of them was that as we look at the consequences of what the Lord gives humanity over to as they reject Him, that's actually His permissive wrath that is out of love.

At the end of class last week, we saw that **"it is His kindness that leads us to repentance."** He has not zapped us yet with a lightning bolt. As we experience the natural consequences and its rottenness, we begin to get the sense that life is not really how I expected it to play out.

That gives us opportunity and grace to turn back to the Lord and ask Him and learn from Him.

And I don't know if it was brought up last week, but we've found the consequences, the built-in consequences, actually a very helpful diagnostic tool for our own lives as well as helping others. We do not generally say, "I am choosing an idol." I don't know if you do. I don't. But what is the sign?

There are times when I'll say, I think I have a case of the idols. You know, what's showing up? If you find yourself fighting for something, being angry to make it happen, or feeling depressed because it doesn't look likely, it's a built-in sign that you have devoted your life to accomplish something that is not the Lord's plan.

It may be a good thing, but it has become too important when I am getting angry way out of proportion to what the circumstances would warrant. What am I fighting for? Why is this so important? And it can be a very helpful diagnostic tool as a believer, because even though we've come to the Lord, we're children of God at the beginning. We're babies. And we haven't done much growing into the new of the spirit yet. Mostly it's the old that is just rote. And it's how we respond to life. It's how we respond to others.

It can be helpful as the Lord lets us see. Usually it's others who see it first around us. Why are you so angry about this? Why is this such a big deal? Or why are you so depressed? It's a sign I have at least one, if not a number of idols tied with this that I think have to happen for life to be good. Or I have to be for life to be good or can't be or can't experience. It's positive and negative. And I will fight for those. All of us will.

Those that God gave them over, as Alan was saying, is actually redemptive because the results show up in our lives and alert us that maybe even if our intent is good, it's not getting played out. The same with the second part, if I'm finding myself reacting all the time—
you tell me what to do, government, a professor, my diet—I will always have a quiet time always.

And then immediately I have to find reasons not to, because when, if the lie I'm God, then I cannot be told what to do.
God's God's aren't told what to do. We're commissioned to rule.

If I find myself reacting to any kind of deadline, even if I said it, it's a sign that in that area, I have decided things have to be the way I have decided.
I'm pretty good. I've got good ideas. But I find myself reacting all over the place.

We had a woman who did seminars for executive groups and she came to us in despair and said, "I've got another one of those coming up and I cannot make myself do the preparation. And I'm terrified because it's coming up in just a few days."

Grad students get caught in this all the time with the studying for the quals or getting ready for their defense, et cetera.
You know, it's, "Oh, I've got lots of time." And then all the time gets frittered on other things because I will not be told what to do.

The last one, is it really the Lord's love that's shining through, showing through me, or are people around me telling me it's all about you?
You may think your intent is good, but in fact, what you're living out is completely self-serving.

It's the failed mind. I'm not going to the Lord as circumstances show up.
What do we do with this? What's your wisdom? How do I radiate you? How do I live you out?

Instead, it's self. It's all about me, the big thing of today. And it's that that shows up in our lives. And it gets pretty ugly. Those are actually a real blessing to understand as a diagnostic tool to help me recognize where some area of my life I’m really mature in the Lord, but some other area I’m not at all. We are a mixed bag like that. It’s an opportunity to keep growing.

So it’s very helpful. We’ll be looking at that with practical examples as we get into the three steps. All of this is helping us to understand extremely good news that Paul declares in Romans 1:16-17.

**"I am not ashamed of the gospel."** Biblical shame is the recognition or the proof or the exposure of having failed. It’s having been defeated in my pursuit of whatever the objective is that I’m set on.

It’s not what we think of as shame. In pragmatic cultures, shame is particularly focused on society, the family, and such. The concern is that you not bring shame on your family and the family name, etc.

I know I’m oversimplifying, but that’s the very common focus of shame in those settings. In our Western mentality, culture focused on individualism and the personal, we think of shame as embarrassment.

There are different concepts of shame, but the biblical concept of shame is neither the pragmatic culture nor the Western culture concept. It’s defeat. That’s what the final judgment is. Have you succeeded? Have you succeeded in your objective? Was your objective the one that the Lord called you to, or was it something else?

"I am not ashamed of the gospel." You’ve certainly heard the taunt, "Christianity’s a crutch." There was a man who had an extremely wonderful impact doing great things for his community. We didn’t know him personally, but we knew people who were close to him.

As he was getting older, he was telling these believers who were trying to proclaim the gospel to him, "If you just had more people like me, you wouldn’t need your God." We know he got a shock. We don’t know exactly what he discovered at that point, but it’s tragic the mentality with which he approached death.

"I am not ashamed of the gospel" because it is the power of God. Christianity is not weakness; it’s power under the salvation of—not going to heaven after you die, though that’s part of salvation—but the power to be saved, not just from the penalty of sin, which is what people are mostly aware of.

It’s not just being saved from the presence of sin when we go to the perfect world the Lord is preparing to replace this one.But what Paul is emphasizing and what his letters emphasize is the in-between, those two: the power of salvation from the practice of sin, here and now.

We get notes of what’s happening. Of all those exercising faith, first the Jews, then proclaimed to the Greeks. **"For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith unto faith,"** from faith to greater faith. As we trust God for some specific thing, we see more of the righteousness of God. We see it in His actions that we welcome and invite. We see Him respond to the invitation. But also, as we trust Him to obey His word and rely on the power and the guidance of the Spirit to work out what God calls us to in His word in our lives and practice, we trust Him for something and we see Him at work, we get to know Him better.

That gives us the encouragement to trust Him to a greater degree, to a greater depth in that area. It also encourages us to trust Him in other areas where we haven't started to trust Him yet, or where we haven't trusted Him very much yet.

As it's written, the righteous one is to live by faith. And faith is trust. We are exercising faith. We are trusting God in practice, and we're learning to trust Him more and more.

An interesting thing shows up in Romans when Paul talks about eternal life. We see insights into what Jesus meant when He gave us the definition recorded in John 17:3, in His final prayer before going to Gethsemane, the so-called high priestly prayer. This is speaking to the Father:

"This is eternal life, that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you've sent."

And eternal doesn't mean then and there. It doesn't even mean everlasting. It means always. And so there's opportunities to get to know God all along.

Interestingly enough, when we continue in Romans 2—Romans 2 is down a page from Romans 1, in case you didn't know—it talks about, in Romans 2, verse 5 and following, that... And the wonderful thing, as the Lord opens our eyes to our need to be saved from our practice of sin, it's explained at the end, and we talked about that last week, at the end of Romans 1 and into the beginning of Romans 2, where we notice the other things that other people are doing that we don't appreciate, especially as they impact us.

The Lord says, okay, you've decided, especially when we reach the point of saying people who drive like that shouldn't be allowed to live. They shouldn't be allowed on the road, so forth and so on. And then when you have young children, the Lord speaks through them.

"That guy cut me off. Nobody should drive like that."

"Daddy, didn't you just cut somebody off? Isn't that the same thing?"

"Oh, be quiet back there. You're not supposed to be talking in the car. Don't talk to the driver while he's driving."

You see it everywhere in the bus. One of our girls decided to put Eric on a point system. Gave her so many points when they set out in the car. And every time there was something that they both knew wasn't quite the way it should be, she lost points. Every once in a while, if she did something wonderful, she got a few points back. Actually, it's fun to listen to Hannah when she's driving in traffic, when she's on the phone and driving in traffic. She's got this steady narrative, but it's really gracious. And she says, "Oh, you're not going to do that, are you?"

"Oh, you are? Okay. We'll all adjust and hopefully not. I'm not getting in an accident. I'm making room for you, but go ahead."

When you judge and practice those things, people who practice those things, verse 22, three, and do the same, that you'll escape the judgment of God or the riches of His kindness and forbearance and patience.

Do you despise them? Not knowing that the kindness of God leads you to repent. The kindness of God is to give us the opportunity to change our mind. But we change our mind when we discover that we are not doing things that other people do that annoy us or worse. And we find that we do the same thing.

God doesn't zap us. He doesn't hit us with a lightning bolt. And we've got to say, "Well, why isn't God wiping me out? If I deserve to be wiped out, why doesn't God do it?"

In that is the evidence that everybody has: that God is a God of grace. God is kind. Also, if we stop and think about it, if God should get me out of the picture, but He doesn't do it, He must have something better. He must have something beneficial to accomplish through not wiping me out.

The gospel in very subtle ways is there for everyone to be aware of. You don't have to hear about Jesus to get to know that God is a God of kindness and forbearance and patience.

But by the working of your heartless and unrepentant heart, you're treasuring up for yourself wrath in the day of wrath and righteous judgment of God, "who will pay back to everyone according to one's works."

To those on the one hand, who through perseverance in doing good works are seeking for glory and honor and incorruption or immortality, eternal life; but to those on the other hand, who out of selfish ambition, not being persuaded by the truth or being persuaded rather by unrighteousness, there'll be wrath and anger to those who through perseverance in good works are seeking glory and honor and incorruption.

What does that mean? They're responding to the revelation in creation. This is not talking about people who have the revelation of the Mosaic law. It's not talking about people who have the revelation of the gospel of Jesus Christ. This is just talking about people in general.

And so the kindness of God gives me an opportunity to change my mind. If you're standing in a courtroom before a judge, you don't step up and start giving him a laundry list of all the things that you do wrong, especially that are illegal. You don't stand up there—maybe you're called in on a traffic issue, but you don't say, "Well, as long as we're here, let me tell you, I changed my income tax last year and I actually bilked the IRS out of a whole lot of money." You don't start doing that. Why? Lose, lose. You hope the IRS doesn't find you, but you're not going to tell the judge. You're going to make a note of this, send a note to the IRS, and tell them to audit me.

In the doctor's office, where you've come to an expert on some particular health issue that you have, you want to tell him everything that you know that seems to indicate something's wrong in your body because you want to help him help you. You're there. It's a win-win situation. You tell the doctor everything you know of that's wrong, hoping that that information will help him to figure out what can be done to help it.

And that's exactly what God's kindness does.

People who think of God as the judge, the big ogre leaning down over the balcony rail of life, looking for someone who's having fun so He can shout, "God." That actually, that's a parody on Paul Little at Urbana, 1973, a little while ago. Erica and I were both there. Incidental note, I saw her numerous times there at Urbana. She never noticed me. Anyway, eventually she did. But not then. It was a matter of timing. The Lord needed to prepare her to be ready to put up with me.

It's the kindness of God that leads you to repentance. It's grace.

The Four Spiritual Laws, Campus Crusade, Bill Bright, has had so much impact. He just took a standard tract that was circulating in many variations. They didn't call it the Three Spiritual Laws, but that's what it was. "You're a rat. You deserve to go to hell. But Jesus died for your sins. And if you want to, you can be forgiven," blah, blah.

Bill Bright looked at it and he said, "My dad liked to say, you catch more flies with honey than with vinegar." Bill Bright looked at it and said that message doesn't start with good news. You're shutting people's ears by the first part of it, and they don't get to the good news. So he tacked on the front end, "God loves you and has a wonderful plan for your life." People started reading it and wanted to continue reading because they were expecting good news.

"I'm not ashamed of the gospel. It's the power of God for salvation." And the whole thing about the Christian life between the time you come to Jesus and the time you go to life in heaven after you die physically, the entire time in between is supposed to be an active dynamic process of being saved progressively in one area after another and to various degrees in the various areas—from the practice of sin. Remembering the wages of sin is death. The earned wages of sin is death.

"I'd like to be set free from the things that I do that are hurting me. And I'd like to be set free from the things that are hurting others too. But even just out of self-interest."

It is the power of God for salvation to those who believe, to those who come to trust God, and by the way, to those who respond to whatever degree of revelation they've got. Everybody has plenty—everything they need in the natural creation and in human nature, as we see it all around us—to know that "I'm not what I should be and God is gracious, God is kind, and He must have some opportunity for me that's better than the way I'm acting now. Or He'd get rid of me, and He doesn't."

Those who respond—and these are not people who are trying to earn their way to heaven. They may be trying to do that because they don't understand otherwise, but they are trying to respond to the revelation of God. Those whose perseverance in doing good works are seeking glory and honor and incorruption or immortality—that is lasting fruitfulness, because those are the three dimensions of life.

Glory is with respect to God, seeking to become like the God who reveals Himself in nature and much more than in nature. Honor has to do with the worth of what you do. You want to do worthwhile things that benefit others. And immortality or incorruption, what does it say? "I want the effect of my life to continue on bearing fruit for people after I'm gone. I want to have a lasting beneficial impact in this world." But notice what they gained: eternal life.

This is not saying do that stuff and you got your boarding pass for heaven. It's saying you are getting to know personally the true God and His Son, who He sent to live a human life on earth to show us what human life can be and to teach us, and then to offer Himself in sacrifice to take away the punishment that we deserve so that we could be set free and be involved by the Spirit of God's life and, in fact, become what God intends us to be.

So eternal life is not when it's always; it's that which has always been true, is now true, and will always be true. We are getting to know God as we respond to Him.

Here, this is a basic response to Him. In fact, we are going to find several times in Romans we're told that things result in eternal life, and it's not, as probably most genuine believers would read, that if you do these things you're going to go to heaven.

Now, very important. I'm going to jump to 3:21. **Now, apart from law, the righteousness of God has been made manifest, being witnessed by the law and the prophets, specifically the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ for those believing.**

Righteousness of God: we become rightly related to God when we trust Him to be God in practice in our lives. He is God, in fact, but He wants to be able to fulfill His will, to bless us with real life.

To those who trust God, who trust Jesus, and trust God the Father working in and through Jesus.

Verse 3:23: **"For all sin and are caused to fall short of the glory of God."**

Two things about this. One is this: all of the early part of Romans is typically translated—almost all our English translations are—all translated in the past. Romans 1, they did this and they worshipped idols and so forth and so on.

The problem is the verb tense doesn't say past. The Greek has past, present, future, and the particular finer nuances of those, just the same as English and most languages that we know. But it also has a verb tense, and that's a bit of an oxymoron to call the aorist a tense because a tense means time, and the aorist is the one verb that says nothing about time.

If you have a past form of a verb, "he went," you know it was in the past. "He will go," you know it's in the future. "He is going," that's now. But when Greek has, and classical Greek has, the aorist, but it was little used, it is a form of the verb which does not specify when.

It is generally recognized among Bible scholars that the aorist participle is the most important verb form in the New Testament. And I think the reason for that is a participle describes something that is ongoing in the time frame that the tense of the verb describes—for him to be righteous and the one declaring righteous, the declaring, it's an ongoing thing.

The thing about the aorist participle—Aorist, that's the Greek grammatical term for it—Aorist just means without horizon, without limit. And that's a good description of it because the verb itself does not say when. Any information about when has to be obtained from the context, but not from the verb form.

That makes the aorist participle absolutely perfect for eternal matters because the participle means it's ongoing. The aorist says this is not a matter of when. It is ideal for describing what is always ongoing, what is always active.

In verse 3:23, we do not have a participle, but almost all English translations will say, "for all of us have sinned and fall short of the glory of God," and "have fallen short of the glory of God." They make it all past because of the mistaken notion that the aorist is a form of the past. That comes out of, I believe, out of narrative. The aorist is used a lot in narrative because you don't have to keep saying when over and over again when you're talking about something that's going on. They use a verb that says when this is in its form, and then you just use the aorist, which is an easier way to keep going.

We haven't changed the time. The timeframe does not change until you get another non-aorist verb, which will specify a new timeframe, or you have an adverbial phrase that says when or another way. Verb is not the only one that can say part of speech; they can be used to specify time.

This is an aorist: "all of us have sinned and have fallen short of the glory of God." No. "For all sin and are caused to fall short of the glory of God." It's not when. We have sinned. We are sinning. We will sin. We will keep on sinning until this life is over. Hopefully, we will be sinning less and less and acting righteously more and more. That's what this is all about, about the salvation, the salvation from the practice of sin. All of us sin because we fall short of the glory of God. Being justified is a free gift, justified or pronounced righteous, as a free gift of His grace, of His favor through the redemption, which is in Christ Jesus.

Then he goes, after saying we don't nullify the law through faith, rather we establish it.

Chapter four. **What should we say? Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh, has found? If Abraham was pronounced righteous from his works, he has a base of both things, but not towards God. What does the scripture say? "Abraham believes God. His trust seemed to keep his promise. And for him, it is accounted as righteousness."**

It makes a point that if you're working, your wage is not a gift.

Somebody, if your boss or secretary in the office comes and hands you an envelope and said, "here's a gift." You rip it open expecting to find some sort of a bonus. On payday, you open it up and it's your paycheck. And it's exactly calculated according to the work that you've done. What's this gift business? This is my money. I'm entitled to it. Don't call it a gift.

The point is that Abraham was not pronounced righteous because of circumcision. Paul points out that he was declared righteous before he was told to enter into circumcision.

And so we get the essence of it in 4:17.

"I'm appointed to be a father of many nations, secure in the judgment of him whom he believed would keep his promise, God the one making the dead alive and calling what does not have being to be." When God promises, it's going to happen. If something's there that should be alive butis dead, God can bring life out of death. Okay? So theThe fact that it's dead is no problem. But what if there's nothing to work with? That's not a problem for God either, calling into being that which does not have being.

We are given the essence of Abraham's faith. Verse 18, Romans 4:18, **"In hope against hope he believed."** There were two things he could look at to establish his hope. Is this hopeful? Is it hopeless? Is it a slim chance? So what did he look at? God made a promise to him.

He could do one of two things. He could look at the circumstances to decide whether or not to trust God to do what He promised.

Oh, come on. Come on. And it goes on **without becoming [weak in belief,] weak in faith. He observed that his body was already dying since he was about 100 years old and the deadness of Sarah's womb.** It had been a long time since his body would do what was necessary to get his wife pregnant. His wife had never been able to have children. It had been a long, long time since her body was sending eggs down the chute to be available to receive sperm and start to grow a life.

Faith is not obscurantism. Faith is not blind, ignoring facts. Faith looks at the facts and doesn't discredit them, but it compares them with other facts.

He looked at the facts about himself. The promise of having a son. How am I going to have a son? I look at my body. No way. I look at my wife's body. No way.

He could have said, "This is bogus, and this is cruel to make such a promise to a couple who have longed so much for what You are promising, but it's absolutely impossible."

Without becoming weak in belief, he observed that his body was already dying since about 100 years old, and the deadness of Sarah's womb, but looking under the promise of God, he did not judge it by unbelief. He was strengthened by faith, giving glory to God.

You look at both of them and instead of judging the likelihood of what God promises by what he can see, what's obvious on the natural level, he judges the natural reality according to what God has promised.

And that's why: the point that He brings life out of death and calls into being that which does not exist.

Instead of getting discouraged or angry in reaction, "This is a dirty trick because I know it just can't happen," he got stoked. He got excited. He looked and said, "Wow, if I'm going to be able to father a child, this is going to be a radical revival of what hasn't been true for a long time. And if my wife, who's never been able to have children and who hasn't been producing eggs for decades, she's way past the time of women to be able to bear children, this is huge." And that's the response of faith. You judge the reality by what God says. The natural reality says this is not going to happen. But God says it is going to happen in spite of the natural reality.
And you say, wow, this is powerful!

He did not judge it by unbelief, but was strengthened by faith, giving glory to God, being fully persuaded that He was able to accomplish what He had promised. Therefore, it was reckoned to him as righteousness. That was being rightly related to God. That was trusting God.

Heading into this surgery, I had a lot of fear because I've been through so many procedures and situations where I've experienced pain on a pretty major level. I was not looking forward to more. I felt pretty tense about it.

I was praying and I was realizing I could just go in tense like this, and it would be worse. Instead, a couple of days before surgery—should have done it long before that—I went on a prayer walk with the Lord and exchanged my fear for trust.

"Lord, you are my good shepherd. You are good."

As the North Africans in refugee camps and other places say, God is good all the time. All the time. All the time. God is good.

So it's an interchange. One starts, "God is good." The other says, "All the time." Then that one says, "All the time." And the first one responds, "God is good."

I've experienced His goodness. And it's based on His promises. So it's not just what I wish He would promise, but what has He promised. And we know that He is good and trustworthy.

"Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death of all kinds, I need fear no evil because You are with me."

And so I went to the Lord and gave Him my fear and welcomed, "Lord, I trust You for this. Whatever You want me to go through, I trust You that You are there. You will strengthen me for it. And You will bring life because You promise all of those things. And You’re the life giver. Yes. And You are Emmanuel, God with me."

I came out of that walk with deep peace and actually was able to walk into the surgery with deep peace and even joyful anticipation of how I would see the Lord in new ways, as well as ways I had seen Him before.

They didn't let her walk in. They laid her out flat and rolled her in. I had to walk in until they did that. It's a choice. Walk into the hospital. They didn't drag me, and I walked in.

And, you know, the Lord always has special treats. The head anesthesiologist was this delightful lady from Italy, Anna Maria Bombardieri. She had a personality that went with her name. Into the OR, she took charge, filled that whole room with her bubbly personality. It was just the Lord's treat of saying, "I'm here. You don't need to be afraid. See, there's even fun in this, even joy and peace."

I have experienced that joy and that peace through the three intense days post-operation in the PACU, the post, you know, pre and post-anesthesia care unit, where they were trying to ship me upstairs, but the staff was fantastic. Lots of opportunities to reach out.

They couldn't send her up to the floor because there were no beds available. And so then they were taking such good care that we said, we know there's a waiting list for beds on a med-surg floor. As long as there's a waiting list, keep going, pushing Erica down to the bottom of the list. Give her opportunity to go up to a floor to whoever is next.

And if the waiting list runs out, well, our time here runs out, but we'd be just happy to stay here for the whole duration. The Lord kept us there for the whole duration of her in-hospital recovery. Wonderful staff and multiple opportunities to serve in their lives.

Because we've learned when our bodies break down, we take Jesus to the medical people. We get to love on them while they care for me and took me through all of the early post-surgery challenges. And there were quite a few, but I'll just give you one little glimpse that was delightful.

There was a black nurse who I could tell was kind of the odd man out because most of the staff were from around the Pacific Rim. I asked her, "And what's your name?" She got ready to be laughed at. She said, "Well," and she pointed to her name. "Most Americans call me Funky."

But I recognized, I said, "By your accent, you're not from this country. Is your name Funke? Are you from Nigeria?"

Her smile just lit up the whole space. She was a believer from Nigeria. We have had students whom we love dearly. Steve mentioned the name of one of them. She said, "My tribe. He was from my tribe." It was just, she felt recognized there. And appreciated and loved right there in this little bay. No windows, just a bay. But she was a believer, got chances to encourage her. She started calling me Mama and came to take care of Mama.

The Lord had delightful things in store that I could never have engineered. As you trust Him for His promises, then you're in the front row seat to see Him. And with Abraham and Sarah, as they looked at the natural impossibility but then looked at God's promises, he got excited because he knew that gap between the natural impossibility and God's promise was how much he would see the Lord. And he did, and they did, and we have. And that's like the nation of Israel outside of Jericho, heavily fortified, first place to take in the promised land when it was time. Not likely that a bunch of former slaves could take a place like that by just walking around the city silently. Around the city silently and go back to your camp. Do it once each day for seven days. Totally terrifying the people in the city.

What are they doing? What is this all about? We don't understand this magic. And, you know, just the crunching of feet on the gravel. And you know the story with Rahab, she says to the spies, "We've heard about God bringing you up out of Egypt. Our hearts have melted. We know we're toast. And now you guys just go around all this thing."

And then one day, finally, you go around seven times. We say, "Oh, boy, this is it. This is it." And what do you do with your weapons? You just shout. Shout victory. Not a pebble has moved yet. And the wall collapses in place. And we've been there where that happened.

And anyway, so it's looking at what God has promised, not what I want Him to promise, but what has He actually promised and the gap of what I naturally expect. And as I trust Him for what He promises, it's that much that I get to see Him. And so do others over our shoulders.

One comment on the last verses, that it wasn't just on account of Him, that is, but also on our account, to whom it will be reckoned as those believing in Him who raised our Lord Jesus from the dead, who was delivered to death on account of our trespasses.

Okay, we understand that one. That's pretty generally understood. Not everybody does. And raised on account of our justification. Easy to overlook the significance of that statement.

Jesus allowed Himself to become the embodiment of all of our sins, even though He had never sinned in His earthly life. And not otherwise either. And so that meant He was condemned to death. He was condemned to eternal damnation unless He got out of that.

Well, by paying the penalty as the innocent victim of all of our evil, there was nothing left standing between Him and life. And so if Jesus was raised from the dead, it means that there was no sin that anyone at any time, anywhere, no matter who, no matter when, was ever committed that was not atoned for in Jesus' sacrifice.

Because if there was one sin that had not been paid for, Jesus would still be condemned and still be dead. But He's not. And so the fact that He was raised from the dead proves that the sacrifice was 100% totally efficacious.

And so then He says, being therefore pronounced righteous. The fact that Jesus was raised from the dead proves that for those who trust in Him and to appropriate the benefit of it, that I have been made righteous because I trust Him who did what was necessary to set me free. We have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom also we acquire access into this grace in which we stand. There's an image here that we don't get culturally of somebody entering a royal court. You don't show up in a king's court uninvited. In this setting, if you did so, the annoyance of your being there would be taken care of right away.

From the story of Esther, even she, the queen, could not appear before the king without being invited. There was only one way around that. She appeared uninvited. Then there was that tense moment that everybody in the court was watching what the king would do. If he held out his scepter in welcome, then she was okay. Otherwise, the guards would immediately throw something over her head, haul her out, and execute her immediately. That's what would happen to us.

People worry about the angry God of the Old Testament. He is only angry about that which is destroying everybody! If you're clinging to that, you will not get a very good greeting when you show up insisting that God should be delighted with you when you're trashing His creation and His creatures.

There is one other factor that has been beautifully lived out by Abraham Lincoln as president in the Civil War. His little boy Tad was welcome in his daddy's office, no matter what was going on, no matter who his daddy was talking to. He was the president's boy and he was entitled to free access to his father.

That is the other thing with this image in the royal court: the heir apparent has free access to the court. He can walk in anytime he wants. It doesn't matter what's going on. He is welcome.

How are we welcome? If anybody were to challenge, "He, she, you're with me." Jesus speaking. "Okay. That's it. I don't need to see your credentials. I don't need to see anything. You have... The only totally powerful escort. No question."

And what I love about that image is that grace means favor. We have favor to enter into the Lord's presence and know that His disposition towards us is that of grace. We have His favor; such a wonderful gift.

In Romans 5, at the beginning of 5:1, it says, **"Therefore, having been justified by faith."** At this point, Paul is saying that justification, the legal acquittal from the guilt of sin, is taken care of. And now, Paul is inviting us to move beyond that. Now that you've been acquitted of the sin, what's next? What comes next in the life of a believer?

Well, immediatelyImmediately we get into the huge benefits of this new standing we have by faith. PointAt the point in time, once we entrusted our life to the Lord and entrusted Him to be the answer to the sin in our lives, point in time,we are born again. Being born again, we have that legal acquittal.And so what What are the benefits we immediately enjoy? You see them: peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. And we've obtained our introduction by faith into this grace in which we stand. So immediatelyImmediately, peace and grace. And that's theThat grace and peace is the greeting that Paul uses at the beginning of every letter.And it's wonderful. And as

As a result of the grace and peace that we have with the Lord, that puts us in a position where we can—and later in verse 2—boast in hope of the glory of God.

In this part of Romans 5, we encounter three boast statements. And interestingly enough, these three boasts match the three exchanges that we saw earlier. And this first boast is in the hope that we are actually going to be able to express God and express His character in our lives.

If you remember, the first exchange is we exchange the glory of the incorruptible God, for the corruptible image of man and four-footed animals and beasts and so forth. The dimension here is, what are we expressing with our life? What is our goal? What's our target? At the end of the downward spiral, we come nowhere close. We're actually actively shutting Him out.

Now, we can boast because of salvation won by Jesus, who was raised for our justification. We are confident that "because He lives," we have the Lord's favor with us. We have peace with Him. It restores our hope that one day, as we're trusting Him, we will get there and we will be displaying Him more and more fully. That is a wonderful, wonderful boast.

I was looking earlier at the different terms for the word boast in different translations: exult, boast, glory, confidence. One even said vaunt. This was the Vine's synonyms. And as I was considering what it means——I realized it's really a declaration that something is worthwhile. It is worthy. And that you have confidence that it will come through.

The negative prideful boasts of man are usually boasting in yourself and you're saying, "I'm worthwhile. Everyone should pay attention to me, and I will be able to do whatever it is I claim that I can do." More commonly, it's not just blatantly boasting in oneself. Often people will boast in accomplishments or money or whatever it is, saying, "This is worthwhile. This is going to deliver."

Instead, here we have three opportunities to boast in the hope of the glory of God. This is worthwhile. I am confident that this is going to take place. And then right after that in verse 3, **and not only this, but we also boast in our tribulations**. And that's a big surprise. Those tribulations, the pressure, the squeezings, literally, in the Greek. And these are squeezings from all dimensions. It's from what happens in life, the circumstances squeeze us. We're squeezed by others, persecution, and putting pressure on us—in the workplace, very common example. The pressure placed on you that is beyond your job description or the pressure placed on you socially, for example, maybe because you're a believer and you're not going to go drinking with folks afterwards or maybe not to the same excess that your colleagues do, whatever the case. And it's also squeezings that are internal.

The example Erica used: she was being squeezed between wanting the benefits of the surgery and not wanting to go through the process. She knew enough from having had enough experiences with a major dislocated shoulder, broken elbow, broken wrist, serious pneumonia, and such. A lot of those things she didn't have a choice about. I mean, she could leave them untreated. But in this case, she had a choice.

The question is, was she going to trust the Lord to carry her through what was going to be difficult and painful, but that she was entering into out of free will choice to trust the Lord for what she was confident He was leading her to? So He left the choice open to her.

If you look at where this goes, what's the reason for boasting in our tribulation in something that's challenging? It says, "we also boast in our tribulations knowing that our tribulation brings about perseverance, and perseverance proven character, and proven character hope, and hope does not disappoint or does not put to shame because the love of God has been poured out within our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us."

Paul is saying the squeezings, the tribulation, bring about—are realizing, oh, as we're trusting the Lord, we're actually able to hang in there and hang in there more and longer than we initially thought at the outset of the tribulation. And as we've done that, proven character—the Greek term is dokime, documentation—we now have documentation that as we're trusting the Lord, He has enabled us to live the new. It's—we didn't expect it. It wasn't familiar to us until this point because we'd never done it before, or at least to that degree. And now we know that it's possible.

Now that we know that as we're joining the Lord, that is a degree of faith that is documented. And from that documentation, from that proof and proven character, once again brings us back to hope. And the hope is that, Lord, I've made progress, right? I'm under grace. It's measuring from zero, not from a hundred. And because of the Lord's love, His love has been poured out, emptied out fully into our hearts because we have His life, the Holy Spirit. We have this confidence with that new life that we're going to grow up to be like Him and be able to take advantage of and live and develop the life that He's given us and partner with Him to do that.

We talked about the downward spiral, and this is really the upward spiral. Often in the Christian life, we'll notice that the Lord is inviting us to grow in one area; say it's relationship to work, and then as we grow with the Lord in that area, it shifts to something else. Maybe it's being more engaged with how one serves at church, for example. And then from area to area, as we join the Lord to grow, we make progress and it's wonderful and we grow in hope as we do so.

And then sooner rather than later, oftentimes the Lord brings back that same issue, in this case relationship to work. It's so easy if we're not aware of the process to get discouraged at that point and say, Lord, we made such good progress here. Why are we back? Why is there the same sense of struggle or maybe even on a deeper level, a sense of pressure and of struggle in this area?

That's actually the upward spiral because the Lord is inviting us to trust Him more and to go deeper and to grow more and more into the glory of God in its fullness. As each step that we take, we make progress towards displaying Him more. As we go through these tribulations, we get to make more progress one step at a time in an upward direction.

The Lord is showing us what these unexpected tribulations (or maybe in some cases expected, especially as we see how the Lord is working in our life in a certain area) are for. What are these tribulations and what are these challenges for? It's really an invitation to welcome a new opportunity to trust the Lord to begin to walk with Him more and more in that area.

Every time it's revisited isn't a declaration of you didn't make progress. "Hope does not put us to shame." It doesn't lead to defeat because of what the Lord Himself has promised.

I appreciated the example of Abraham, as we look at his journey of faith and the promise of the promised child. And if you look at it, it's interesting because Abraham does trust the Lord, but we can see his faith grow. With the tribulation, he remembers God's appearing to him in His promise. But then he's looking at himself and he's looking at his wife. He's got to be tempted to say, really? Really? Then he comes back focusing on the Lord, but it took a long time. A woman who's pregnant doesn't start to show until at least four or five months. And I love when—I forget which chapter it is—Abraham is talking with the Lord and he says, you know, what shall you give me? Because I have no son, I have no heir. He says, my heir is basically the servant in the household. The Lord says, no, surely you will have a son.

Not too long later, at least in Genesis, it may have been actually a good number of years in reality. There is a promise of a son, but why don't we give this Hagar thing a try? There's Ishmael, and the Lord says, no, no, we're talking about a son through your wife. And okay, he gets the idea. It's still quite a long time before Isaac arrives.

It's wonderful. You see Abraham's developing greater and greater trust throughout this process. Yet in that time, Abraham is becoming more and more attached to Ishmael. This will be an issue. He's squeezed between all the hopes that he had, focusing those hopes on Ishmael because that was the only evident answer. Then he finds there's a different answer. He really got squeezed.

It's the difference between, on the one hand, there's tribulations, and on the other hand, there's the hope of God coming through with what He promised. And, he likely reasoned, well, we have Ishmael. God says, no, no, no, it's going to be through Sarah. Abraham's saying, wow, really? Okay. It's wonderful.

There is also the point where Sarah laughs and says, "Shall I know pleasure again being old?" What that indicates to me, at least, is they're not having intimate time together. They're not celebrating physically. As Abraham hears the promise, he says, well, Lord, this is amazing. We better try this again. It had been a while. He's trusting Him. You see the fruit of that trust.

It culminates in Genesis 22, where the Lord calls Abraham to take Isaac and to sacrifice him on Mount Moriah. In Hebrews we see that Abraham reasoned that God was even able to raise Isaac from the dead. One of the amazing things about his faith is he always wakes up early in the morning to go. He wakes up early in the morning and goes on a three days journey. As he said, he can't go back to sleep; he's excited. This is the day we're gonna do it, let's go. I'm sure he's praying and thinking at that time. I love what Steve said: faith is not ignoring the reality and saying, there's only what I understand to be true of God. It's evaluating what you see and evaluating the information that you have given what the Lord has told us. And so I'm sure Abraham is doing that as he's going and he's thinking, "wait a second... the Lord has made it abundantly, abundantly clear. It's going to be through Isaac." And now he's looking at the Lord calling him to sacrifice Isaac. And so that's the squeezing that he's in at that time.

I think that's how he is able to reason, "Lord, your promise is abundantly clear. We tried the other methods. It's going to be Isaac. And yet you're calling me to sacrifice him. Lord, I believe you're still going to come through on your promise. Through Isaac, your seed will be named." Hebrews 11 points out that the implication of that is that though we're not told that in the Genesis narrative, it's obvious that Abraham believed that God was going to raise him from the dead. He believed he really was going to sacrifice him. But that was not going to stop God from fulfilling the promises of the innumerable seed of Abraham being through Isaac.

I thought it was such a wonderful illustration of what Abraham accomplished by faith, and what he did by faith was a foreshadowing of the giving of Jesus to be the propitiation for our sin. As he's going and as he's learning to trust God through tribulation, perseverance, and documentation, Isaac was born, Sarah conceived, and then hope—that, Lord, you are going to accomplish everything that you promised to accomplish in fullness.

You think about the end of Abraham's life. He has two sons and owns only the little plot of land where Sarah was buried, which he way overpaid for. But given all that he'd seen of the Lord so far, I'm sure he had full faith that the Lord was going to do everything that He had promised in terms of making a nation of both Isaac and of Ishmael, of giving him possession of the land and more and more.

I think it's just beautiful. That's what the Lord calls us to, and we look at all of His promises to conform us to the image of His Son, which is what our Romans "How to Change" series is about. As we take steps to trust Him and see bits of growth, He's taking us all the way there.

It's not being discouraged at how little growth there seems to be, or how much there seems to be left. It's thanking Him that, Lord, you're using every tribulation to draw me closer, to teach me to express You more and more.

Allan mentioned earlier the hundred percent, zero percent thing. Law takes as a standard perfection. The only thing law can measure is how much of a failure you are, how far you've fallen short. And that's what happens. In churches that emphasize law, people are dragging their knuckles on the ground as they walk around. I'll never measure up.

Grace assumes nothing. Grace measures how much success, how much accomplishment so far. Grace is the grandparents looking at the little child who's starting to pull up on the furniture and fall on their behind again.

They don't look and say, "You fell again. You're never going to get it." What do you see? "Oh my gosh, Tommy took a step. Oh, wow. Wow. Wow."

"Look, Esther went all the way across the room before she fell." And okay, yeah, you're going to fall, that's not a worry. You're doing it, you're getting it, you're learning, and it's wonderful.

The other grandparents who take care of BB and Justin's kids, our grandchildren, when they're not in school—Kaylee's now doing school, at least part-time. I don't know if there's full-time yet or not, but it was part-time, and so she was with the grandparents except when she was in school. Now Tilly and Charlie are with the grandparents all the time when Daddy and Mommy are working.

Occasionally they make some video clips and send us one that's either very encouraging or fun and humorous. It's wonderful.

What do we hear in the background? "Oh, you did it! Hey, yeah, you're dancing! Look at that! Look at that! Wonderful."

And that's the matter. God looks at us knowing that He is going to take us all the way through perfection. He has no question where we're headed, and He's neither embarrassed nor discouraged by the process.

He knows that as we're first learning something, we are going to fail many more times than we succeed. The wonderful thing is, He has designed us to be looking at the goal. He's designed us to be motivated by hope.

"I'm like you big people, and you walk, and so I'm going to walk." They just keep trying.

You watch a kid who's set his hopes on accomplishing something, which is the bane of the people who try to design more new and more ingenious childproof pill bottles.

What do the grandparents do? "I can't get this bottle open." Hand it to the little kid. He'll open it for you.

Even if the child has never opened one of them before, I guarantee you it'll take time, but pretty quickly the child's going to hand you the bottle with the cap off. You just got to watch and make sure you're attentive when it happens, even though it may take a long time. But it's the persistence. They just don't give up. And the reinforcement is the occasional reward. "I did it. I did it. I get the thing back on. I can't get it off. I can't get it off. But I did it once. I'm going to do it again. I haven't figured out what I did that succeeded, but I'm going to do it again."

And that's the way the Lord looks at us. He delights. He delights in the process, in the normal process of our learning to walk by faith and to live righteously instead of continuing to fail in practice.

Now, all sin and fall short of the glory of God. The term sin, and interestingly enough, both in the Hebrew and in the Greek, the primary term for failure is an archery term, which means to miss the target, miss the bullseye.

And I'd like to find out sometime, etymologically, I think there's a relationship between trigonometry with the term sign and the word sin, because they both measure going off course.

But all sin and fall short of the glory of God. It's not just that our aim is bad. It's not just even when our aim is perfect that the bent arrow goes off course. And I did archery using wooden arrows back before they would make it so easy because the arrows are all perfect. They're not. And you had to get to know this arrow versus a different arrow and what it's going to do. It's not just that it veers off. It's that it doesn't have the power to go as far as where the target is.

All sin and fall short of the glory of God. But God enables us to succeed. And not only do parents encourage their kids, but we get to encourage one another, especially in long-term relationships where we know the places where we don't represent the Lord very well.

And if there is a believer there who is saying, yeah, you blew it there, but I know who you are. You are the new creation. I know your heart. I know who you're growing into. And also who is thanking the Lord for every step of progress and saying, when you were patient that time, it really blessed me of letting one another know when you trusted the Lord to really display Him. It was such a blessing. And that encourages us forward.

And the nursing staff and the PACU did that with me. Every little step of progress, they were cheering me on. And that gave me courage at times when it looked like it was never going to happen. But they were celebrating.

Yeah, and they see the opposite. There was one lady there. They were trying to get her to do stuff, which you have to do. You have to get active again.

No, it hurts.

But...

We know it hurts, but you have to do this in order to be able to get back.

No, it hurts.

You will never be able to walk again.

I don't care. It hurts. I won't do it.

You will not be able to return to your home.

It hurts.

That was very sad.

So, you know, exalting in the tribulation, because we know that's not natural. We're not masochists. And usually we groan when something like that shows up. But instead, if we understand what the Lord's purpose is, then we can go with it. Okay, thank you, Lord. It's growth time. Help me to grow as much as I can instead of resenting that it's hard or feeling sorry for myself.

There are many believers who don't understand this. They have the hope of heaven and say, "I'm now a believer. So life's going to be great." They don't understand the growth process. And then when it's difficult, they feel betrayed by the Lord instead of reading the Scriptures that tell us this has purpose.

This isn't that suffering has merit in and of itself. There are various philosophies that say that, and that is not true.

Thank you, Lord, it's growth time. I want to grow as much as I can, learn as much as I can. Then I grow and I bless everybody around me who sees it and give them hope that they can grow too.

If you can grow, I think I can grow. That's part of the joy of it, that we get to encourage each other forward.

Steve and I have done that for each other. Steve has grown so much. That gives me hope and courage that if he can grow that much in that area, and I know how he would respond naturally (as the old man), but instead what I see is patience and kindness. It's such an encouragement. If he can grow, I can grow.

We've given our adult kids that. They tell us, they cheer us on. "Wow, you guys have really grown." When your kids tell you you've grown, you know you have. That encourages us forward, but it's giving them vision for what they want to do.

It's a process. We used to be on a fixed syllabus, but now it's more flexible with the course. Every once in a while, the girls start to ask us, "What are you teaching now? Marriage? Thoughts?" I'll be praying for you. Because you're going through refresher labs.

A beautiful thing about encouraging each other brings to mind a run, a very memorable run I went on with a friend with the Stanford team. We decided to go out. We were just having fun and cruising along. We'd already been out about six miles when we were figuring our course as we went.

We decided, some of you may know the terrain, we're out in Woodside and decided we're going up to Pinata College, which is up on the top of the hill. Already run six miles and going along at a good pace. We started up the hill without any word between us. One of us started to push a bit, the other one pushed back and it went back and forth, back and forth. Of course, a little bit of slacking up but we were tired, working hard, pushing harder and harder and going faster and faster up that long, steep run.

It was amazing, the mutual encouragement. And with it, I'm not sure we even exchanged a word. It was wonderful.

We're into overtime now. But you have to finish with the third. There's always a but God. The third exalt or boast in verse 11.

"Oh, you mean eternal life?" Yeah. Not only this, but we also exalt or boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we've now received the reconciliation.

Through this process, we get to see the Lord Himself. We see the Lord. We are reconciled to Him. We are drawn closer to Him. We get to know Him.

It turns these very areas that can be the darkest, the most discouraging, those again type issues of, oh, no, I did it again. And others are saying that too.

The response of grace is not to say, I knew you would. Or I'll believe it when I see it. That's what I believe it when I see it. I see it. You blew it again. Not encouraging.

Instead, "I know that the Lord has promised. I know who you are and you will get there." But as we trust Him to do that, we get to know God Himself.

It turns those dark areas into places where we get to know the living God. And so do others over our shoulders.

The truth is truth, whatever I or anyone else think of it. There was a pastor who was quoted as saying, "God said it, I believe it, that settles it." And then he was corrected. "No, God said it, that settles it, I believe it."

This is such a wonderful encouragement because these three boasts are and this entire section is really the foundation and the hope that we have to take the three steps that we'll look at in the coming weeks.

It's easy to forget that sanctification is a battlefield. It's warfare. There is the flesh battling against us. There's an adversary that has a keen interest in us not growing.

In those moments where it feels discouraging, it's so helpful to come back here to Romans five and to see the Lord's unwavering and unshakable commitment to us. And that He's designed this process. It's not a surprise to Him.

We can take courage and encouragement in that, to continue trusting Him whatever the tribulation that comes is. Continue trusting because He has promised to cause it to work together for good to those called according to His purpose to be conformed to the image of His Son.

> Heavenly Father, we're so thankful for Your tremendous love You've poured out, giving us Your Son and Your own very life by Your Spirit poured out to the very last drop into our hearts.

> Lord, thank You that we came to You by faith and we get to grow in You by faith as well. Growing in the hope of truly being able to show You forth, to express You, to live full of joy and life. Just real satisfaction and fulfillment, no matter what life throws at us, because we've gotten to know You, because we've grown in Your character. Lord, thank you for the process that you so often use to grow us and to grow our hope, to make it more and more specific, seeing in specific the ways that you've enabled us to triumph in areas that are very personal to us as well as in ways that others can easily recognize and be greatly encouraged by.

> Lord, we thank you for the amazing picture and the promise you've given us that "the righteous one shall live by faith."

> Lord, we ask that you would encourage us strongly in this and in the areas that we run into and run up against this coming week.

> Lord, we ask that this would be a strong encouragement to continue to trust you and persevere, see the proven character of your Spirit expressed in our lives and to grow in hope as a result.

> Lord, we ask that we'd be rejoicing with you with every baby step rather than putting ourselves under a yoke of law to welcome your grace and to thank you for it and to live and to grow by it.

> Lord, we just thank you so much for the riches of your Word and your close presence with us.

> We pray this in Jesus' name.