> Oh Lord, we are so thankful for Your mercy and Your grace, Your love, and Your watching over us. Lord, thank You for protecting Erica during the surgery. Lord, thank You that it went very well and that there were no surprises and very effective and that her leg pain is gone.

> Lord, we ask that You would continue to be with her and with Steve as she is home now and is healing. Lord, we ask that Your hand would be upon her as healing is a process and takes time and is not easy. And Lord, we ask that You would enable the healing process to be smooth and You would continue to give courage and just the grace to connect with You through the pain as Erica begins to start walking as soon as she possibly can.

> Lord, thank You that Erica said that she hasn't felt any fear going into this entire process as she has been trusting You and meeting those at the hospital, some who know and love You and others who have just been such a blessing to her and have just given her such good and attentive care. Lord, we are so thankful for Your grace and Your kindness.

> And Lord, we thank You for our time tonight. We thank You for this text in Romans 1. Lord, thank You that You reveal to us where we as unredeemed humanity go wrong, where we reject You. Lord, thank You that You don't bring judgment immediately, but for Your grace and Your patience and Your kindness that draws us back to Yourself.

> Lord, we ask that as we're in this text and as we look at this downward spiral in Romans of our rejecting Your design for us and Your allowing us to suffer the consequences of it, Lord, that You would give us insight into the dynamics that are working and have worked in our own lives as well as in the lives of others. Lord, we ask that You would give us hearts of compassion for those that we meet and for the news that we see and read.

> And Lord, we ask that You would use these insights to alert us of Your invitations for us to grow. Lord, we ask that it wouldn't just be an academic time, but You would speak and underline Your word to each of us and where You're calling us and inviting us. Lord, we're so thankful. And we pray in Your name. Amen.

Last week, we were in Romans 1:1-17, and we went through a lot, but I just wanted to highlight a couple of the key verses from last week.

We started with what is Paul's purpose in writing Romans, and it's to bring about the obedience of faith.

And we talked about the obedience of faith is not just external making it happen, but via faith, which at its root is trust.

It's out of a trusting relationship with the Lord, learning to change our behavior in practice.

We also talked about how the root of the Greek word for faith is pisteuo: being persuaded.

The process of the obedience of faith is the Lord persuading us to really trust Him and to really make it our will to do what He has called us to do and live how He's called us to live.

The real reward of the obedience of faith is a really close relationship with our Lord. We get to know Him more, know His love for us more, and rest in that.

It is a wonderful calling, the obedience of faith.

And now, the question is how?

Paul, as he goes on in verse 16 and 17, talks about what is our resource to grow in the obedience of faith.

He says, **"For I am not ashamed of the gospel because it is the power of God unto the salvation of all those exercising faith [or of all those who believe], the Jews first and also the Greeks."**

It is the good news that gives us the power to actually make progress and to actually change. And then in verse 17, again, the emphasis on faith.

**"For in it, the righteousness of God is revealed from faith unto faith. As it is written, the righteous one is to live by faith."**

That's what we looked at last week.

Tonight we get to look at the results of our rejecting all that the Lord has called us to, and how we are being subjected, as it says in verse 18, to the wrath of God.

Many, when we hear the wrath of God, think of His punishment, judicial wrath. As we continue in the passage, we'll see that's actually not what it's talking about, at least here in Romans 1. It's talking about His permissive wrath.

God in His grace has restrained much evil. We've seen that even as we've been praying for Erica and her surgery. All that we were aware could happen, and praying that the Lord would restrain. And we're so thankful He did. In God's permissive wrath, He lets the restraints off because we've decided we want to take that course of action apart from Him. He says, okay, go for it. That is His permissive wrath.

As we'll see at the end of our text for today, His permissive wrath actually has a wonderful redemptive purpose, which is to persuade us to trust Him. We do it our way. We see what the results are. He allows us to see what the results are. We come to the realization, "hmm, this doesn't really work." As we come to that realization, we are persuaded and invited to turn to Him.

So let's read the text, starting in verses 18 through 21.

Verse 18: **"For God's wrath is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of persons who are stifling the truth in unrighteousness. Because that which is known about God is evident among them, for God makes it evident to them. For His invisible attributes, His everlasting power and divinity have been constantly being understood ever since the creation of the world, being discerned clearly through His works so that they are without excuse. Because coming to know the attributes of God, they do not glorify Him as God or give thanks, but they render themselves useless and their reasonings and their uncomprehending hearts become darkened."**

In verse 18, it starts with God's wrath being revealed from heaven against all ungodliness. It is revealed because of our stifling the truth in unrighteousness.

As we begin to look at the following verses in 22 to 28, that is actually the specifics of God's permissive wrath as described here in Romans 1. As many of us are familiar with this passage, it is easy to focus on the negative downward spiral in verses 22 through the end. But it's actually really wonderful that in verses 20 and 21, Paul is actually giving us a high-level description of the positive goal.

It says the invisible attributes of the Lord are revealed to us through all of creation. And what's our response? The response is that we are called to glorify Him as God and give thanks.

And we've talked about glorifying God is not just being in church and worshiping and singing songs, but glorifying God is expressing His character in practice at any time and in any area of life. As we express Him, we glorify Him.

As we come to know the Lord through all that He has revealed we  get the sense that "Oh, there's something beyond just the physical that we see. There's something marvelous. There's something eternal," our goal then becomes to glorify Him and express His character.

The second element is giving thanks. As mentioned last week, giving thanks is thanking the Lord for the way that He set things up.

So one of them is our goal and the other is our response. And it's wonderful. They serve as bookends for how the Lord has called us to respond to all that He has revealed to us starting from creation.

Before launching into the downward spiral itself, I wanted to highlight a couple of things to pay attention to and to listen for as we look at this passage. It's tempting to get discouraged, examining unredeemed humanity's rejection of the Lord's call and the natural consequences and seeing things just getting worse and worse over time.

But the things that are redemptive and helpful to listen for: we'll see by the end of Paul's analysis that these three steps in the downward direction are completely comprehensive of the ways that humanity rejects what the Lord has called us to.

And it's great that it's comprehensive because then it's not, "Every time I have a growth area, I need to figure out where I'm going wrong among a million possibilities". Instead we can ask, "Lord, where are You calling me to grow among these three dimensions?"

And it's wonderful that they are all laid out for us clearly here. It is the beauty of the way the Lord works. He brings infinite complexity out of others' simplicity. ABC 123. Genesis 1 explains to us how God goes about things, which we can see every day. Because it's the way we operate, and we do so because we've been created in God's image. We are designed to show observers how God does things.

If we look in Genesis 1, we will see immediately everything He does. He starts with deliberate, intentional purpose. God said, "Let us make man in Our image" and then He proceeds to make that happen in practice. He executes that purpose in practice. Then there is a beneficial result. He imparts that blessing to the intended beneficiaries.

If we read through Genesis 1, we will see that happen over and over. If you look at the first three days: the first one is, "Let there be light." Then He brings order, and so forth. So we have light, we have the hydrologic cycle, and we have plant growth. The result of that is the continuous propagation of plant growth; basically, He’s created the food supply for living beings.

And so He creates plant growth, but then that propagates indefinitely. The result of those three elements, those first three days, is why the third day has two parts. The same thing happens with the second triad of days, culminating in the creation of human beings.

And then He establishes the rule of human beings over the realm of living beings, our management responsibility. The result is the management in the realm of living beings of affairs by human beings. That goes on indefinitely.

And that's the pattern we see over and over. And we see it on different levels. The creation of human beings is especially notable.

Genesis 1:26-28: God said, "Let us make man in our own image, according to our likeness, let them rule." That’s the purpose statement.

Genesis 1:27: "God created man in His own image. In the image of God, He created him; male and female He created him." That’s what God did. Notice three elements in there.

Then the third element is God blessed them, told them to be fruitful, multiply, propagate. But then even within verse 27, you see the same triadic presentation.

"God created man in His own image." That’s relationship with God. Only God can look at a human being and see a representation of Himself.

"In the image of God He created him." The other observers are not God. It's not the human being. Who are the observers? And they have to be observers who have already been named in Scripture.

People immediately think of angels. There hasn’t been any mention of angels. That’s not the point. The living beings, the animals. Animals are to look at human beings and see a godlike being that they will trust.

"Male and female He created them." That third element is about relationship.

So it's all triadic fractals. If you know about fractals, a pattern that keeps repeating. And you read Paul's writings, and one of his letters will be in three blocks. You look at each of those three blocks, it's got three sub-blocks. You look at one of those and there are three sub-sub elements and you just keep going on down as far as you want.

Now, how far that goes is how far the Lord is inspiring Paul to develop the thing. And if you actually, if you read Scripture anywhere, you will see this pattern.

Usually, like in the narrative in the Old Testament, you'll see different depths of detail. So it may go down two levels and continue on. It may go down three levels then come back to two levels and not work the next element out to the third level, and then it may have something that's important and take it down four levels.

So anyway, that's the basis for Romans 1. Why the three steps down in the downward spiral? And what is the significance of each one of those three steps?

The first one has to do with purpose. The second one has to do with activity. The third one has to do with relationships.

It's a comprehensive analysis of the problem. And it's wonderful that the analysis is comprehensive in scope as it comes to the dimensions in which we reject what the Lord has called us to.

As Steve mentioned, we'll see very shortly for each dimension that we exchange what the Lord has called us to for a counterfeit.

Note that there's only one of the real thing, but there are infinitely many counterfeits. That's where this text isn't proclaiming a "one size fits all", or "apply this to everyone and give them the exact same formula".

Instead, it's showing us the three dimensions that are essential that the Lord has called us to understand so that we can respond to Him.

Another note to listen for: as we go through this text and look at all of what God hands humanity over to as they reject Him, it gives us a set of diagnostic questions to ask.

We've all at some point or another come to the realization, "This is not what I thought life was going to be like." These choices that I've made, I thought would come out quite differently. Sometimes we figure that out very soon. Sometimes it takes years or longer for us to come to that conclusion.

But as we have been there, this text will give us a set of diagnostic questions for which dimension was it where I blew the Lord off? And help us to return to Him on that dimension and on that basis in order to present ourselves to Him and trust Him to grow instead. And so there's really a redemptive and powerful diagnostic element to looking at this text. As Steve said, another thing to listen for is it's so easy to look at other people's problems and just think, what's wrong with you? But as we read this text, we look at what's behind the behavior. The behavior is often a symptom.

Years ago, I watched a YouTube video about folks who had come out of and recovered from horrible, hard drug addictions. They would all say, paradoxically, "the drugs weren't the problem. They were the solution. They were a fake solution."

We look at the symptom and think, oh, this is so horrible. But as we look at these, we'll find that there's very often something much deeper going on, important issues that many of us have had to deal with personally or are still learning to deal with. That gives us so much more compassion and wisdom for prayer for those who show the symptoms and we are turned off by them or even judgmental about them.

The turning in the reasonings is interesting to look at in Genesis 6. The cause of the flood was that "every reason of the thoughts and the intentions of the heart was only evil continually." It was the reasonings, particularly generating, fabricating, and with the heart purpose.

After introducing this downward spiral, let's jump in.

Starting in verse 22, **"Professing to be wise, they became fools and exchanged the glory of the incorruptible God for a likeness of an image of corruptible human beings and birds and four-footed animals and crawling creatures. Therefore, God hands them over in the lusts of their hearts into uncleanness to dishonor their bodies among them."**

Paul in verse 22 has a bit of a transition. He says, "Professing to be wise, they became fools." In Scripture, wisdom is the know-how to be successful in life. In verse 18, there are those who are "stifling the truth in unrighteousness." They say, "We don't need God to figure out how to do life. We can figure it out ourselves." That's the so-called wisdom they profess to have.

But Scripture tells us that's just about the definition of foolishness: to say, "I can figure it out without the Lord."

What are the areas in which they profess to be wise and yet become foolish? The first exchange is exchanging the glory of God, the incorruptible God, for an image of corruptible human beings.

What is this all about? This is about the dimension of motivation, of the heart, of what have we decided is critical? What have we decided is really important to be successful in life? Or what have we decided is absolutely detrimental? If that happens, life is over or life is not worth it. And the Lord has called us to have our ambition and purpose to display Him, to glorify Him in practice and to say, "Lord, you are my I AM God. You are the provision of everything I need for life."

This exchange is saying, actually, I'm going for something else. Something else is life.

We have all sorts of examples of idolatry, from huge ones to trivial unspoken ones. They're just givens. Last night, Steve gave the example of, do you like to squeeze your toothpaste or roll it up? Which is a funny example. Do you just grab it and squeeze it or do you roll? And the underlying question there is a question of convenience versus optimization. If you roll it, you get every little bit of toothpaste out. If you squeeze it, it's very convenient.

Even things like this can become things that you argue over. You'd be amazed how many marriages have a major tangle over squeezing or rolling the toothpaste tube. We came up with a solution. A win-win solution. Squeeze away whatever you want. The solution is a binder clip. You squeeze away as much as you want. Then you screw the cap on tight. You roll it up as far as you can, put the binder clip on the roll, and flip the tabs back up. Then you can squeeze away until the next time to put the cap on and roll it up. You get convenience and efficiency.

One thing we miss in reading Romans 1 is almost all translations translate this all as past tense. Most of this is in the aorist, which for a long time was thought to be a form of the past. That comes out because narrative uses aorist, but the aorist by definition, and the Greek term aorist means without horizon.

The point is that the aorist tense, we don't have such a thing. It's the timeless tense, which is an oxymoron because tense means time. It's a form of the verb that does not specify when. The when may be clearly defined by other elements, but not by the verb alone.

This is really helpful in Scripture because it's possible to describe something without saying when, without putting it in a historical context. When we translate Romans 1, we translate these aorists as present, as the ever-present present: true in the past, true now, true in the future, always true. That's true of eternal things.

Bear in mind, this is not just talking about, oh, those guys way back then. The danger of reading it that way is we can feel very self-righteous because that's what they did way back then. But we don't do that.

This is really talking about what people do at any time, at all times. This is just the issue of human nature. Paul anticipated that people reading this might be tempted to say, oh, other people have this problem, but what's wrong with you guys? In Romans 2, he says, "You who judge others, you practice the same thing." And actually then turns it to actually God's grace and kindness is actually leading us to repentance in order that we would recognize there's still time to turn back. And so exactly, Paul is also underscoring, as well as the grammar and the verb tenses that he used, that this is always at play and a factor in our lives and in the lives of others. And we always have an opportunity today.

> Is that for the whole 18 to 25 aorists?

Let's see. Yep. This whole block, it's all aorists.

So we looked at the first exchange as an exchange of what's our goal and losing sight of or deciding it's not that important to have our goal to be to glorify God, to express Him. And instead saying something else is really important. And that's my bottom line for what it takes for life to be good.

I'm mentioning some more of the trivial examples. But actually, the idle under whether we squeeze or roll the toothpaste is something that's quite a lot bigger. Is it efficiency because I'm afraid that I won't have resources and that there's not enough? Or is it convenience because things should go in ways that are convenient for me and it's just annoying when they're not?

It's important to recognize here what we're talking about and then setting up images. "Let us make man in our image." God created man in His own image, so image is really important in this thing. So we're talking about conceptual images.

Easy, we get to see the term idol, and we think of religious statues that people bowed down to, and we don't do that. So, okay, it doesn't apply to me. Yes, it does, because it's talking about conceptual images. And the physical idols, the whole point of the physical idol was not because there was anything in the physical thing. It was what it communicated to the observers.

The issue here with idolatry and with the images, it's the conceptual image. Who am I? Who are you?

When I was training and competing as a distance runner, there were guys on the Stanford team who thought of themselves as running animals. That was their concept of who they were. Running, distance running was everything to them.

If you and we said that distance running is a relentless god. It dictates, if you're serious about competitive running, it dictates what you eat, how much you eat, body weight you maintain, how much sleep you get, and those things start making decisions that affect other things, like do you party Friday night when you've got to meet on Saturday, and so forth.

We're getting a pretty clear picture of the images that we substitute for our true purpose, which is to glorify the Lord. In verse 24, it says, **"therefore, God hands them over in the lust of their hearts into uncleanness to dishonor their bodies among them."**

Our bodies were created in order to glorify the Lord. That's our target. As we exchange the determination of our hearts for other things, for counterfeits, naturally we cannot fulfill our purpose. So our bodies are dishonored.

We looked at lusts being the strong drives or the compulsions. They're logical imperatives. When I have decided A must be true, for example, in the runner analogy, I've decided that I have to get a PR in this race. That's what's needed. Maybe by running well, if you're a high schooler, that will get you into a good college. And, the logical chain can go quite deep, often at a subconscious level. At some point it becomes "this is what it means to be worthwhile as a person".

And OK, so you've set up your goal: I have to get a personal best in this race. Logically, what must you do to accomplish it? And what is very threatening to you? Maybe in this hypothetical example, you have siblings and your younger sister is crying at night because she just had a breakup. You're saying, I don't want to talk to you. I need to go to bed because I have a race tomorrow.

Logical imperatives say I must do certain things because they are in service of something that I've already determined in my heart is necessary, critically necessary for life to be good. Those are the lusts and the compulsions.

Last night, Steve also pointed out this word lust is often assumed to refer to sexual lusts. But in Scripture, it actually had a much wider meaning than that, which is logical imperatives, compulsions.

The New Testament uses this term positively in quoting Jesus at the Last Supper. He opens by saying to them, "I have lusted to eat this Passover with you." No English translation translates it that way because we have narrowed our use of the term lust to the sexual arena. So you can't translate it that way to modern people. But that does show that this is not just sinful compulsions.

Why was Jesus saying, "I have been eager to celebrate this with you" because He was compelled to do this? Because that was the purpose of His coming: to show us what a true godly human life looks like, what our lives should look like, and then to offer Himself as the only perfect human being who's ever lived on earth to give up His human life, His incarnation of the image of God, as a human being, in substitutionary atonement for our sin.

That was the compulsion that drove Him to the cross. He was horrified at the prospect, but He was compelled because that was His purpose in becoming a human being, the culmination of His purpose. We see that this first exchange is instead of being part of the Lord's wonderful calling to be part of a story that's so much bigger than ourselves and showing Him forth, bringing His kingdom from heaven down to earth, we just exchange it for something that's so much smaller and so much more limited in scope, and it deals out ultimately in death.

This is what we experience not just at the end of our physical lives. We experience it as we see that this idol does not actually deliver on the life that it promised.

Now, let's look at some of the diagnostic questions that are helpful.

You start diagnosing from the symptom: the consequences the Lord has allowed to show up in our lives. In this case, it's that we're given over to these lusts.

We feel compelled to do all sorts of different things. If we take a step back and look at them, we realize, "Ooh, that's kind of rotten," or "Ooh, I don't actually want to live this way, but for some reason, I keep on going there. I'm compelled to go there".

Helpful questions for this are: Where do I find that I'm reacting in a way that's way overblown, way out of proportion compared to what's normal and makes sense? Why am I so driven about this? Or, why does this drive me in such a way that I don't spend any time with my friends or family, and I'm only working all the time?

That's a common example, especially in this valley. That drivenness, that this matters so much. Or that this is such a hot issue for me, are all early warnings that there's very likely something that you've decided in your heart is critical for life. Idolatry, conceptual images where you've replaced the Lord with something that is unable to deliver on its promise of life.

That's the first exchange and consequence.

So now, verse 25: **"Whoever they are who do this then exchange the truth of God for the lie and come to worship and serve what is created rather than the Creator, who was blessed forever. Amen.

Therefore, God hands them over into dishonoring passions."**

What’s the exchange in this case? We’re exchanging the truth of God for the lie. Many translations say "a lie," but the Greek actually uses the definite article—the lie.

What is this talking about?

When I first started reading this text, I felt that the first two exchanges were almost the same thing. One of them is the glory of God, and then this one’s exchanging the truth of God. What’s the difference?

As I was pondering this after class last night, I think the Lord helped clarify yet a bit more for me.

The truth of God is what He tells us about how He set up life to work. And that’s the truth of God. We see it in His word. These are the absolutes of life. This is how life works. And we exchange that and say, actually, life should work the way that I want it to. Really, it's autonomy. It's saying, "Even though I know what You told me, I'm just going to do it my way, and I'm just going to assume that it works."

And surprise, surprise, sooner rather than later, we find out life actually doesn't work however we design it ourselves to work.

Steve, do you have any thoughts on that?

Yeah, and we get, well, the key here is serve. And so we serve what is created. We serve the creature. We serve people. And we serve created things that we let call the shots as to what we do and what we don't do.

This is the "Tell me what to do, and I won't do it. Tell me what not to do, and I will too." This is the terrible twos that we all went through and drove our parents nuts.

This is the dishonoring passions. They're reactive emotions. This is the problem with the law. That's what Paul gets into in his analysis in Romans 7.

"I could do what I wanted to do as long as I didn't come across a commandment to do something. And once I did, that was off limits because I was caving in to being mastered and I'm not going to be mastered. I do my own thing."

So my own thing is my own thing. Then you tell me something, some rule. Okay. Then I can't do that because that's not my thing.

All of a sudden the rule backfires because I'm determined to be a free agent and not cave into doing what I'm told.

That's why we have to transcend the law by the Spirit. The Spirit will actually lead us to keep the law, but without having our focus on rules.

As you know, it's the "You tell me what to do and I won't do it," or "You tell me what not to do and I will."

The truth of God is the Lord giving us loving guidelines for this is what is truly beneficial for life.

We're exchanging all that the Lord has told us and graciously given us for life to be good, for what actually works in life, and saying, actually, I don't need that. I can do better.

Or just saying, again, as Steve said, in order for me to demonstrate that I'm free and demonstrate that I am a free agent and have a free will, I have to at least disobey or not do the optimal thing sometimes.

With these first two, I find myself thinking of a fateful night. It was the night before the national cross country championships.

I was housed with a buddy. I really enjoyed running with him, but he was an Olympic athlete and I was not.

He was relaxing before the race the night before the race by drinking a six-pack of beer, and I knew I can't do that.

He was getting on me, "Come on, you're uptight." I was uptight about the race.

I didn't have any delusions of doing beautifully in the race, but I was glad to be participating anyway.

He just got on me so much. He could just do whatever he wanted. He didn't have to follow the rules and that thing. And I knew I needed to follow the rules, but finally I caved and I had two beers with expected consequences.

I finished about in the first half of the field, which was decent, but not nearly what I would have done, and I would not have been up anywhere near him.

He could get away with breaking the rules. I couldn't. And I didn't.

**Therefore, God hands them over into dishonoring passions, reactive emotions.**

I know what's beneficial, but... not today! We've all been there.

I think the helpful diagnostic questions to ask for this are: Where do I find myself getting distracted from what I know I need to do or what I know would be really beneficial to do?

I've experienced this—and Erica has also shared similarly in the past—where I'm slated to teach the word. I've set aside good chunks of time days before, weeks before. And yet as the time approaches, what am I doing? The dishes. Or, it's a great time to take a walk and get some fresh air. Maybe I should write some code. OK, I think I do that one quite too much. Or I'm playing chess online, whatever it is. After I get through with that, I say, huh? Over half the time, it's gone!

And then it continues: OK, well, now I don't have time to do it "perfect". But if I can't do perfect, I might as well not do it now!

Not proud. But it's happened. It certainly has happened.

Those are the dishonoring passions, those reactive emotions.

It's very helpful to look for where I am distracted from what I have decided is beneficial to achieve what I've committed to at heart.

Another version of this is when it comes to rules of prohibition.

A classic example is diets. I'm on a no sugar diet because I'm getting insulin resistant, whatever the case may be. And yeah, well, you go a week or even two weeks doing a wonderful job, no added sugar, and then it's the happy hour after work and they are ordering, oh, I don't know, ice cream. Everyone is there. And, well, you know that you've committed to it, but just this one time is totally fine. And so you do it.

For things like physical diets, it may not be a huge deal to break the diet in moderation. But we've probably also seen the example of someone keeping a diet very strictly for quite a long time, and then suddenly breaking the diet and going crazy in the opposite direction, which is unhealthy.

Somewhere in the boxes of papers in the basement, there is a sheet of paper that I have kept. It was graph paper, just rectangular grid. I decided at one point, so what's my caloric intake for healthy training as a distance runner? So I started logging this bar chart. It goes along very smoothly for a long time. Then all of a sudden—and I was holding back at that time—all of a sudden, the bar for one day goes all the way up to the top of the page and continues on the back of the page, halfway down the page. That was the reaction. Nobody tells me what to do. Even I can't tell myself what to do. Because I got to break out. I've got to be free from the constraint.

So the diagnostic question is: Where do I find myself unable to consistently do what I've committed to or what I've decided to? And where do I find myself not consistently able to refrain from what I've decided is not actually beneficial?

Actually, a personal example: it must have been a couple of years ago now, around when I was coming out of undergrad. For a good number of years, I was very easily and very often depressed. There were many reasons for it, but one of them was just negative thought patterns and a lot of self-pity and allowing that to just grow and grow and just camping out in that area.

A couple of years ago, actually, it was through this Romans how-to-change series where the Lord spoke to me very clearly about various idols that I needed to take care of, as well as this dimension two issue. I had certain triggers that really got me spiraling down towards depression and the Lord showed me, Allan, you really don't need to engage in those any longer. And I've had ongoing, substantial victory for several years now; depression is no longer a pattern of life.

But in the last month, I found there were times where I wanted to listen to certain songs that really get those thoughts and emotions going. I started listening to those songs and thought, ah, yeah, it's fine. Oh, I have it under control. It'll be totally fine.

Soon enough, a day or two later, I found myself saying, "Lord, I am not where I wanted to be."

This is the dimension two of, Lord, you've shown me the boundaries, the practical wisdom. "Here is what is beneficial. Here is what's not beneficial." And then me saying, ah, Lord, this works! It's been great. It's been wonderful. But this time's an exception. It's going to be fine. And quickly finding out and quickly verifying, Lord, what you showed me before, it's still true. And I still want to follow and still want to respond to You there.

So that's the second exchange. Hopefully it paints a good picture and is helpful with some of those diagnostic questions as well. Let's continue on.

The third exchange, verse 1:26b, **"For their females exchange the natural function for that which is contrary to nature. And likewise, the male..."** Either way, it's still not sexual yet. The natural function it's talking about here is not sexual roles.

While Steve has pointed that out, something that was really helpful for me to understand is that this Romans downward spiral is not primarily focused on sexual sin. When you first read it, it's so easy to think that. You see the word lust, you see "dishonor their bodies", you see "dishonoring passions", and then you see "male and female", "natural function", etc. It's so easy to immediately conclude this is talking about sexual immorality. I think two things really helped me to see that this is talking about a much broader, actually the entire range of issues in unredeemed humanity's rejection of the Lord.

The first one, very simply, if you look down to verse 29, it says the fruits of this downward spiral is this Pauline list of various forms of unrighteousness.

And almost none of them are errors of a sexual nature. If you look at that list, it's actually the entire range of, you know, selfishness, evil, rejection of the Lord, rejection of God. It's the entire range.

The other thing that was helpful as I was looking at this is in verse 20, it refers to the creation. And so Paul is looking and has in mind our call and commission in the creation as he is analyzing this downward spiral.

And it was really helpful to see that these three elements of these three exchanges are actually related to rejecting each element of what it is to be made in God's image.

So earlier, Steve quoted Genesis 1:27, and it's "God created man in His own image. In the image of God He created him. Male and female, He created them."

And so the first element, as Steve mentioned, is focused on God's relationship to us. He looks at us and sees us made in his own image. And what is the unique thing that the Lord can see in us that no one else can really see? The unique thing that he can see is our heart.

And we see that in 1 Samuel when David is anointed to be king. And the seer Samuel is unable to see why God chose David. And God tells him God looks not at the outward appearance, but at the heart. God sees not as man sees.

And so this first element is about exchanging in our hearts the goal of what life is about. Is it about the Lord and what He’s provided, or is it about something else in creation, some other counterfeit? And so the first exchange is relinquishing our purpose at our heart, at our motivation level.

The second element is, "in the image of God he created him." And the focus in this dimension is what observers can see. What they can see is the activity. What choices are you making? What are you doing? The second exchange is about practical wisdom for what to do. The Lord has given us boundaries for our benefit, and we decide at various points to say, "Yeah, that's good. I'll follow it." Or, "Heck no, I'm going to do whatever I want to do." It's focused on that activity dimension.

Thirdly, "male and female, He created them". That's about relationship and our being made male and female as a key part of displaying who God is. It's part of glorifying God. It glorifies the Lord to have loving relationship between individuals who are very similar, essentially the same, but also with major distinctives.

As we get into this third exchange, we'll see that the focus goes from sacrificial love of others and service, joining the Lord to serve, to total self-focus. The bottom line is, "Is this like me? Does this help me? Does this support what I want to do?" And "me" is the bottom line. I found it very helpful to see these three exchanges are a wholesale rejection of Genesis 1:27. And again, Genesis 1:27 is our overall commission and what it means to glorify the Lord.

So we see that this downward spiral is universal to all sin issues.

Now, verse 26, females exchange the natural function. What's the natural function of the woman as we look in creation? To be the man's ally, partner.

And actually, if we look at what God says the paramount purpose of marriage is, it's to demonstrate His absolutely committed love. No matter what. Never ending. That's why it's very explicit in Malachi: "I hate divorce." So does the Lord.

Why? Because it's a rejection. If you look at the central characteristic of the Lord, of the true God, it's His absolute, unchanging, unwavering love. "You can do anything you want, but I will not reject you."

You have the free will to accept or reject the relationship that I offer to you with Me. But I will never, if you accept, I will never fail you.

For example, in Joshua 1, in the commissioning of Joshua, "I will not fail you and I will not forsake you." "I won't slack off and I won't abandon you." That shows repeatedly and that's the Lord's dealings with Israel.

Israel is fickle. Israel is loyal at times and totally ungodly, blowing God off at other times. But the Lord never rescinds His covenant. People can walk away from the relationship that He offers, but God will not walk away from it.

He does allow people to reject Him, so He doesn't force people. But He does not fail anyone who is willing to accept Him and to trust Him.

Because marriage is given as a picture, everything about our life is designed to be a picture of God. Marriage is designed to show the world how God relates to His beloved, whoever responds to His love. Exchanging the natural function for that which is contrary to nature. Being individual, saying, "I don't need men. I don't need a man." This is very strongly being lived out in our society right now.

**"Likewise, the males let go of the natural function of the females.** Now it becomes sexual, **becoming inflamed in their longing toward each other as males among men, males working out the shameless deed, receiving themselves as a necessary consequence of their error."**

What is the issue? It's men looking for relationship, intimate relationship with other men, but not with women. The point is not what the practice is, though the practices are referenced.

The issue in 26B and 27 is a rejection of the partnership of male and female. Women turning away from being interested in men, men turning away from being interested in women, which is saying that it's about me.

"What I need relationally is more of myself." We see the culmination of that in 28a: **"As they fail to consider it worthwhile to hold God in true knowledge."**

If your bottom line is "I need more of me," where is God in this picture? "I don't need a human being of the opposite gender. I don't need God. I'm just an individual. Period."

At that point, God hands him over to a failed or worthless mind because the mind is not accepting any of the three aspects of God's nature. And so now there's no reference point, and so anything goes.

That's why we get this list starting in the second half of 28: He hands them over to the failed mind to do those things which are not fitting. In verses 29 to 32, it's a whole spectrum of life according to the fall.

Life leaving God out, not just leaving God out, but shutting God out. "The weapons of our warfare are for the destruction of fortresses, the tearing down of speculations, and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God" (2 Corinthians 10:4-6).

People are not just blowing God off, not just ignoring Him, they are deliberately building defenses against Him and His influence. We wind up fighting against God.

It really gets dark as this downward spiral concludes. It is worthwhile to see.

Let's read through the rest of chapter one and then into chapter two and see what's the purpose of this and what's the hope in the midst of where we end up at the end of this spiral, which is total rejection & refusal to acknowledge God in our thinking.

**"Being been filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, evil, full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malice, acting as whisperers of God-hating slander, arrogantly violent people, braggarts, inventors of evil, disobedient parents, without understanding, that is not persuaded to trust in the people. Without understanding, untrustworthy, unfeeling, unmerciful."**

**"Knowing the righteous ordinance of God, that those practicing such things are worthy of death."** You ever heard "people who drive like that shouldn't be allowed to live"? People make statements like that, and we think things like that. Those kind of people just shouldn't be allowed.

Now, this is where he catches us. **"Knowing that those practicing such things are worthy of death, not only do them themselves, but also agree heartily with those doing them."** We encourage each other.

Years ago, there was a cover of Time magazine that read, "Lying? Everybody does it." In a fallen world, we encourage each other in unrighteous living.

God uses that because we get caught in our own snare. **"Therefore, every one of you is without excuse, oh you who are judging, for in that you judge others—and everybody does—you condemn yourself, for you who are judging practice the same. For we know the judgment of God is according to truth upon those practicing just such things."**

A Stanford psychiatrist professor working with hardened criminals in San Quentin found that these men had no consciences. They just could not recognize or acknowledge that they'd ever done anything wrong. And how do you reach them? And they finally found the way to reach them. It was to get them to talk about how they'd been wronged by others. They could talk for hours. Then, when asked, "How did you feel when people treated you this way?" they were really angry about it. And then help them to see the similarities between the things that they thought were intolerable and the crimes they'd been convicted of.

This is God's method that He uses on every single human being. We fall into our own trap. The key is to look at the redemptive side of it. "God causes all things to work together for good to those who love Him, those who are called according to purpose," those who respond to His calling to recognize and live according to His purpose for us all, for every human being, if we'll accept it.

The point in Romans 1 is the lead-in about the effect of the fall all the way down. Paul will take us through each one of these three downward steps and go extensively into how God brings life out of the death of that downer step. And that applies to every issue in life. This is key for ministering to people because to deal with an issue in your life, you have to address all three dimensions of the downward, and you have to take all three steps upward with the Lord.

And that's why so many believers just give up and say, I guess Romans is not really talking about here and now; it’s talking about what happens after we get to heaven. And there are pastors who, after decades of ministry will say, people don’t really change. And pastors who feel terrible about themselves because they're not able to live what they have devoted themselves professionally to urging other people to live.

This three-dimensionality of every aspect of ungodliness in every one of us is true. It is the key to being able to address issues successfully. We will be looking at how to address things, one aspect after another, and how to put the three aspects together regarding a specific issue.

The iteration for this year is seeking to make it as practical as possible. We understand the three dimensions and the three steps, as well as how to take those and apply them.

It is very helpful for counseling, whether with issues we see in our own lives or in the lives of others, where we can look at these diagnostic questions and, not saying "I'm going to fix you", but lovingly joining the Lord alongside them to identify where He is inviting them to grow.

It's what we looked at last quarter in Ezra 7:10: "Ezra committed himself, he set his heart to study the law of the Lord, to do it, and to teach statutes and ordinances in all of Israel."

As we learn to take these steps ourselves, we gain so much in insight and power as we join the Lord to encourage in the lives of others. This is a wonderful invitation and opportunity for all of us.

It has also been helpful as I've been reflecting on these three steps upward in the how-to-change: to recognize that it's a wonderful way to read God’s Word.

God gives us the absolutes of life in His Word. And it's really helpful to read any given passage and begin to look at these dimensions.

"Lord, where am I? As You describe where true life is, have I made this my determination? Am I receiving Your provision? Am I resting in You? Or is it something else?"

Then we can focus on the specifics. In these specific situations, "Lord, how do You call me to respond? How do You call me to act?" Learning to obey in those scenarios and even planning ahead of time, before we're on the battlefield. "Lord, I want to know what is the life-filled response that shows You forth."

And for the last step, how do I join You to do this, flowing out of relationship with You? Being fully free to please You? The rules aren't in mind anymore at this point. I've learned overall what it looks like to obey as I've taken step two: the activity and the actions that please You.

In the last step, it's transitioning to: Lord, I just want to please You, whatever it is. It's not about the rules. It's about life and relationship.

Since all Scripture teaches us something about where real life is in the Lord, you can begin to make it really practical in your own life by asking, "Lord, is there idolatry I have concerning this? Lord, is there specific wisdom I need to respond in practice? Lord, show me. Show me how to respond next time. And how do I live this out in my life, in my context?"

And lastly, "Lord, what does this look like as a lifestyle of worship that goes together so tightly with You and in close fellowship?"

One of the sweetest treasures of this process is that as we grow in the obedience of faith, we grow so much closer to the Lord and we know His ways. The intimacy with Him is so sweet and so worth it. That is the treasure that we store up in heaven that no one can take away, that neither moth nor rust destroys.

So yes, the downward spiral is a bit of a downer. Even looking at the end in the last verse, verse 32, giving hearty encouragement to others doing the same: this is the world arrayed against the knowledge of God. This is people getting together. It's a mutiny. It's a rebellion. It's saying, "We don't need God, and we're all going to get together and encourage each other", as if you can stand against the living God.

It is dark, and we see that at all levels, wherever you look, at all levels where humanity is, in the world, in our country, in our communities, in ourselves. If we're being honest, we see elements of this in ourselves.

But there is wonderful encouragement as we go through this quarter. The Lord is here to redeem and takes us far beyond where we were before we took these steps. We are going beyond the garden, as Steve likes to say. We're going beyond the obedience of Eden where our natural instinct wasn't tainted by sin.

But now we've been fully persuaded by faith and trusting the Lord and growing that much closer to Him.

Let's pray to close. Afterwards, for those who came a bit late, maybe Steve can share a bit about how Erica is doing and we can have some fellowship time as well.

> Lord Jesus, thank you so much for Romans 1, for this text that shows us such a detailed and helpful analysis of where life went wrong and where we go wrong when we're living in the flesh and our focus is not on You. Lord, we ask that You would bring each of us back to this text over the week.

> And Lord, we ask that this would be a place of prayer, of seeing these areas where all of us in different ways have made this exchange, this fatal exchange. Lord, we ask that You would show us in Your grace and in Your mercy how You are inviting us and calling us back to You, to address these issues and to present ourselves fully to You in order that we might grow and be filled with Your life in practice.

> Lord, we ask that this quarter would be a wonderful time going through Romans. We ask that it would be really clear how to apply these three steps and how to come free of these things which ail us and prevent us from knowing the fullness of Your joy and joining in Your glory.

> Lord, thank You for the magnificent calling that You have given to all of us to glorify You as God and to give thanks. So Lord, we ask You to continue speaking to us and growing us in these times together. In Your name. Amen.