> Lord, thank You that we just celebrated Easter. We just celebrated Your resurrection. Thank You for the lengths to which You have gone in Your love to reach us. And thank You that You've opened the way for us to be Yours, to be filled with Your own life. How amazing, Lord, is Your love for us. And thank You that Your mercies never fail. Great is Your faithfulness.

> Lord, thank You that you filled us with the Holy Spirit, with Your own life. And we ask to give You joy in the way that we use the new life that we have. May we give You joy in growing in You; what You've died to enable so that we show You forth more and more clearly, especially to those that are close to us, where it's the hardest sometimes to bring You to every person in our life and to the ways we approach management. How we manage our minds, our time, our living space, everything that we have stewardship over. May we honor You and radiate You more and more.

> Thank You for each of our brothers and sisters. We ask that You will greatly encourage everyone and underline for each of us where You're inviting us to grow and lead us forward. In Your name, amen.

As you know, we're starting into step two of how to grow and change. And as we reminded the students last night, this is material, though it's been there since the time the Lord inspired Paul to write it in Romans, most believers don't understand what we're looking at. They understand how to come to Jesus. They understand, at least some of it, how to evangelize, understand that hopefully their name is in the Lamb's Book of Life and heaven is ahead. But they've just added a much higher bar of ethics to go at with the old resources, the flesh, and end up discouraged, feeling like, where's God? I'm praying for change. I want to change, but I can't seem to. I seem hardwired. I'm just an angry person. I'm just an alcoholic. I'm just a worry wart, totally tied in knots with anxiety. I'm just, and you can fill in the blank.

What we've been looking at is the information that we have, the wisdom in Romans, and it shows up in many other places, but Romans is the most extensive and detailed, of how do I actually cooperate with the Lord for real change, where He and I agree this area of my life does not show You forth at all, or at least not much? And those repeat issues, that we can distance ourselves from the Lord. How can I keep coming to You when I did it again, whatever it is?

We looked last quarter extensively at step one, where it's the "not My will but Yours be done" of Jesus in Gethsemane. It's the I renounce the old approach, which does not show You forth at all, and I welcome instead what You say in Your word that is already written on my heart by the Holy Spirit. It's Your will and mine, but I haven't lived it out. I haven't made it my conscious will. And as we looked at with step one, I renounce the old approach in prayer with the Lord, and I understand from Him, from His word, what to replace it with in specifics, and then present myself to go for it.

And that's what repentance is. Repentance is to change your mind, change your thinking. But this is much deeper. Step one is the change of my committed purpose, my objective, my goals in life with regard to this specific issue.

And as you recall, and you see it right away in Genesis 1, everything God does starts with deliberate intentional purpose, then proceeds to do what is necessary to make that happen in practice, and then imparts the resultant blessing to the intended beneficiaries. And then, once those three developments are in place, the result is then an ongoing lifestyle that propagates, reproduces itself indefinitely as it's welcome.

The first step is the change of will at heart, at the seat of motivation. It's the working out in practice of the Gethsemane prayer, not my will, but Yours be done, which also is the first petition in the Lord's Prayer. Beginning and end of Jesus' ministry. And Father in heaven, hallowed be Your name. Your kingdom come, Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Your will. And God's will for us is blessing. God's will for us is light in all its fullness.

After taking that first step of the change of objective, one more aspect of that that we've really gotten into is not just I want to be patient instead of angry, but what is behind that anger? It's the idols. And we've talked about that. What were the things that drove the old lifestyle? And going to the Lord with those and replacing those. You can't just go for the behaviors. You have to go for why did I develop that behavior? What was the life I thought I was going to get from my approach? I'm afraid, I'm overwhelmed, I get angry to make people back off. And it's going to the core of it and taking that to the Lord and replacing that with what the Lord calls me to instead.

Having done that about this specific issue, then there's the promise at the end of that: sin shall not lord it over you, sin shall not master you, for you are not under law but under grace. And the question in verse 1 of Romans 6, leading into the discussion of step one, shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Basically, why bother to change? I'm forgiven. God likes to forgive. I like to sin. I like to do whatever this particular thing is. So, hey, we got a good thing going. I sin, He forgives. I sin, He forgives. Hey, let the party roll. But of course, sin really isn't the party that it is made out to be. And that's the deceitfulness of sin. It doesn't lead where it promises to go.

Having done that, then the next question is, remember, God delivered intentional purpose, then specific action to develop, to make that purpose happen in practice. Now we come to step two about specific action that makes that change that we're committed to a living, working reality in my lifestyle.

**"Sin shall not lord it over you. You're not under law, but under grace"**. What? Shall we sin because we're not under law, but under grace?

And now we're not talking about ongoing lifestyle. We're talking about individual, moment by moment, opportunity by opportunity. I'm not under law. I'm under grace. I'm not going to get punished. Of course, I do have the deceitful pseudo life, which is not really life, and that's the downward spiral of God's wrath, His permissive wrath, letting us go our own way and learn the hard way about what we're not convinced of as He speaks to us and instructs us and warns us.

One note as we head into this. I mentioned it with step one, but again here at step two, ask the Lord to show you one particular area in your life where He's inviting you to change. And if you can't come up with one, think of what someone who's really close to you would come up with and apply these truths in that area, and you will grow, and it will give you joy, and it will give those around you joy, for all of us. Make it specific with one specific area.

And as Erica said, people around us generally have more awareness of things that would be good to see change in our life than we ourselves see. Our intent is good, but the delivery is often not.

I love the way Charles Schultz did it in Peanuts, and Lucy Van Pelt is there making the declaration, "I've never made a mistake in my life. I thought I did once, but I was wrong."

Shall we sin, point in time, individual issue, which is what we deal with? When we deal with the issue before the Lord as to what we're fighting for and fighting against, that's step one. But now, acting on it, now it's a matter of repeated, point in time, again and again, opportunity by opportunity, to live the new and practice instead of the old. And if we don't take the opportunity, then we'll do the old again.

And this is the issue of, does one time matter? And we have an active adversary who's there saying, "You're not an uptight legalistic Christian, are you? One time, eh, it doesn't matter. In the long run of things, what difference does one time matter? Just a drop in the bucket." We've all heard that, and we've all given into it too. Mañana, I'll change tomorrow. But right now, I seem to be getting life from this, and I'm going to continue it.

And He's saying, and where we're going now is, actually know what you're choosing. It's not just the come-on. It's not the life that I think I'm going to get from it. What am I actually choosing? And this is very helpful for making good choices.

And the question here is, where does the just one more time lead? And where it leads is to enslaving habits.

Each time we decide something, the first time we are confronted with some choice, no matter what it is, we examine the alternatives very carefully because we're unfamiliar with this choice between these two alternatives, and we want to be sure that we make the right choice. Okay, once we've done that deep scrutiny and acted on whichever we chose, the next time around, this is familiar. A lot of what we do is just rely on what we did before. I have already looked at this. I've already considered the alternatives. I know what I like, and I'll do it again, unless I really didn't like the results, and then I may reconsider.

But if we like, and remember we're talking about something that has been a lifestyle for us before, we do like it, but to choose because we've realized that what seemed like life is not actually life, and there is something infinitely better that the Lord offers, and we've chosen the new, even though the force of habit would have us do the old, each time we look at it and we choose the new, we become more and more inclined to choose the new next time around.

But we've chosen the old so much where we weren't even conscious of choosing because it was just the way we did things, that we do have to make a conscious choice each time. And each one is an opportunity to reinforce that the new, what the Lord commands, really is better than the old. It really is life. The other only seemed like life.

The question, and the way Paul puts it, is, **"Don't you recognize that when you present yourselves to someone as slaves for obedience, you are slaves to the one you obey?"** Wait a minute. What's this slaves for obedience bit? You know, I call my own shots. Do you really? We choose, but there are built-in consequences.

And what is it that is controlling me and making me keep choosing the old? And the question is, what is this furthering? That if you, for the one you obey, be it of sin to the outcome of death or obedience to the outcome, righteousness. So I am choosing what to obey. I like to think I'm my own master. It's not true. I don't really get to do everything from scratch. The question is, what am I responding to? And responding is a thing if I'm responding to the right thing.

We are not designed to be God. We try to be God, try to play that way, but we really aren't. And so we really don't have infinite choices. There is one thing that is life, that is righteous, that is according to God, that is rightly aligned with God and His infinitely loving, good, life-giving purposes. And so we have something going for us.

The change of masters. Verse 17: "Thanks be to God that all of you were slaves of sin. You now obey from the heart the particular teaching to which you are committed."

What are we talking about? We changed what our heart commitment was by taking step one. We were slaves of sin. We just obeyed its dictates. We didn't think we were obeying anybody. We were just doing what I do. We had one believer who said, "I'm now a Christian. Whatever comes into my mind, it's a sanctified mind, so it's from God. I have the Holy Spirit, so..."

And Paul is saying, no, there is so much that we've developed to date that's in our history, as well as the DNA drive to choose for ourselves rather than listen to the Lord. And so we come to the Lord responding to Him, and we grow by responding to Him. This is not just behavior change. It's growing in trusting Him to develop the new, step by step. And He did say in John 8:34, "Everyone who commits sin is the slave of sin," so I'm choosing.

And he also says in 2 Peter 2:19 that, "For by what a man is overcome, by this is he enslaved." We are enslaved to the force of habit, but also the question is, what are we serving to further? Remember, the Lord starts with deliberate, intentional purpose, and then He acts, taking practical action to develop and make that purpose happen, to attain that end. And the question is, what purpose, what cause, are we contributing to every time we obey the dictates of that cause?

And the sin, the determination to do my own thing, and next week we will get in, in chapter seven, we will get into what sin is, what this sin in us is, this dynamic. We know about sin as a particular type of behavior. We know about sin as the result of engaging in ungodly action. But what is this sin? We're starting to talk about sin as an agent, as a dynamic, and we'll get into that.

But you have become committed to the particular teaching that you responded to in step one, and you are now you're being set free from sin. You've been set free from that, and you become bound in service to righteousness.

Now, the Greek vocabulary makes no difference between slave and servant, right? We use those two terms, and we use them very differently, with very different implications, and we can see what they have in common. It's both about taking action in accordance with something, some motivating something. But it's hard to translate into English, because do we translate slave or do we translate servant? And actually, we start out as slaves to sin, and we become servants to righteousness. We serve in the cause of righteousness. We serve in the furtherance of that which is truly life, as God helps us to understand, as God teaches us and models for us in the incarnation of Jesus.

And we are now committed to serve the cause of righteousness. And in this area, we are committed to furthering what God has shown us is righteous, is truly life, godly life, instead of what we were probably not consciously bound to, enslaved to. We were just doing what comes naturally, which came from a combination of modeling and pressuring influences and enjoying pleasurable but destructive experience.

We now have become servants of righteousness, and that's much nicer. We are serving. We have the privilege of serving actively to further godliness in this world. And every time we obey God, instead of obeying sin, whatever it is, we further godliness in this world. We model it, and others see it. We let people learn by observation how much better what God calls us to in His word is than what comes naturally in this world.

Paul's point is, in talking about being enslaved, said, "I'm speaking from a human perspective on account of the weakness of your flesh." The flesh is everything about us that we were born with and has continued to be developed, everything other than the Holy Spirit, the natural human being, naturally sinful human beings, naturally self-seeking, naturally rebellious against authority, naturally hostile to God because I'm born to rule. I'm God-like. I know it. Therefore, everybody should just look to me and get their direction for life and just be like me.

I'm not gonna say who it was, but there was somebody who was very influential, did lots of very beneficial things with the substantial amount of money that he had. Various believers were around him, were acquaintances, friends, and tried to share faith in Christ, tried to share the gospel with him. He wasn't interested. He told them, "If you just had more people like me, you wouldn't need your religion. You wouldn't need God.

So a good man, but not a righteous man. Anyway, hopefully he got the message, even though it wasn't apparent outwardly.

The question is, again, where does it lead? Whatever choice we make is habit-forming. Just as taking step one doesn't mean that we automatically are going to do the godly thing every time from now on, it doesn't. We've got the new commitment coming up against the old entrenched habit. That's what we're dealing with now, is how to further the triumph of the new commitment over the inertia and resistance, active resistance, of the old habit.

Just as taking step one doesn't stop you from the inertia of habit, you still present your members as slaves to impurity and lawlessness. Impurity, that which is not godly, and lawlessness, resisting authority. Nobody tells me what to do. Tell me what to do, I will not. Tell me what not to do, I will too.

I think we may have mentioned already the friends who had twin little boys, and there was a season in which they liked to go around the house singing the rules, "don't do this while they're doing it, always do that while they're refusing to do it, or whatever. The issue was not what they were doing, but they were having fun defying authority. That's the lawlessness.

**Now, present your members as servants to righteousness**. I have the privilege, opportunity by opportunity, whatever this particular issue is, I have the opportunity to make things change from the old to the new, but I have to make that happen time by time. As I do that more and more, the temptation pressure of the old will diminish, and the inertia and the consciousness of the benefit and the reward of the fruit of the new, it will become stronger and stronger.

My lifestyle, my habitual lifestyle of what I do in practice, in action, will change progressively over time, and the old will become less and less natural to me by familiarity and habit, and the new will become more and more familiar, and I will choose more and more readily to do the new instead of the old.

Use an example of anger, and then a number of other examples. I may have developed a real anger habit. I may have seen it growing up. I may have found it useful to control people when I'm either overwhelmed and afraid or stressed and want people to back off. And it's easy. Again, we develop habits because they're useful. We get some life from it, or else we wouldn't do it. We're not stupid.

These developed habits, I can realize from the impact I'm having on someone else, this is terrible. This is not showing You, Lord. And remember, Romans 1 says that our goal is to glorify God and give thanks, to show Him forth to the people of our lives and to give thanks that He's God, not me, for the way that He orchestrates things.

I may have recognized that my anger habit is completely self-serving. It is not from the Lord. I may have renounced it. I may have gone to step one. I may have recognized what was behind it, renounced that, and replaced it with, instead of trying to protect myself, I go to You, Lord, for protection. You protect my life. You give me life. And then Your way is not to angrily demand, but to present to a... replace it with patience and kindness. The Lord is **compassionate, gracious, slow to anger, abounding in lovingkindness and truth**, and so on, Exodus, **forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin**, Exodus 34, as the Lord reveals Himself to Moses.

Another thing with the anger, which was really helpful for me, was, don't you know, this is what the Lord gave me when I was saying, what can I do? I don't like getting angry, but I get trapped at times. And the Lord said, **don't you know, it's the kindness of God that leads you to repentance**. Okay, I know repentance means change your mind. Why do you get angry? Because you're trying to get somebody to change their mind about what they're doing or not doing. And, oh, there is something I can do.

With this first changing the lifestyle, it's helpful to ask in that first section of what do I want to be mastered by? I've changed my overall commitment to But now I still have the old lifestyle and the old urges to use anger to back people off or somehow get control again or to make other people be responsible, whatever it is, whatever the goal is.

But what He's inviting us to realize is, what am I actually choosing? Do I want to be mastered by the habit of anger? Because that's what I'm doing.

And then the second question from 17 through this section, through 19, is: do I want to further the habit of lawlessness? It's habit-forming. It's not just, yeah, I did it this time, but I won't do it again. Every time I do the old, it gets worse.

And with secular counseling, they'll say with anger there are two options. Either you stuff it down. That's not healthy, but it's still down there, and it will still come out at the most inopportune times of reaction that goes way beyond what's merited. And that's not good.

Or I can find a safe way to vent it. So go beat on a pillow. I don't know what it still is, but it was for a while in counseling people who have been diagnosed with a terminal illness, and the stages of grieving include anger. Good observation. People move through these stages fairly routinely. And the answer was to give the person a pillow and put in a half, two-foot length of rubber hose and let them vent their anger by beating the pillow.

That relieves the pressure momentarily, but it builds the habit. It increases the lawlessness. It makes you go farther in that area and make it a more settled habit and a valley you fall into.

And instead, present. Choose to present your members. And why does he say your members? Because he's talking about practical activity. Your members, meaning, what do you do with your body? This is not just abstract, totally in your mind. It's, I mean, what are you using your body to do? To express anger? Or, using that example, because I know you used it earlier with step one, and lawlessness leading to further lawlessness builds the habit. It gets easier and easier to disregard the rules, disregard the advice, disregard what God says in His Word, either disregard it or actively rebel against it. So that habit increases, both with this issue and in general.

You become more and more hardened. And yeah, you're aware of what God says in His Word, but yeah, because you addressed that so many times that it's no longer an issue, which is too bad because you're becoming insensitive to words of life.

Present yourself as servants to righteousness, to further righteousness, to further godly practice, unto sanctification. Oh, what's happening? As I'm furthering righteousness, as I'm choosing to use my bodily resources, including my mouth, to do that which is godly and which furthers God's purpose, that results in sanctification.

What is sanctification? High, holy, religious terminology. But you may notice sanctification, saint, holy one. Sanctification means putting something to its intended purpose. And that's exactly what God is doing with our lives. As we do this, we become more and more what a human being is created and designed and capable of becoming, with God's involvement welcomed. And we're talking about how to do that progressively.

Rather than more and more fighting off God, I become more and more godly and more and more awesome, because as we become more godly in practice, we glorify God more and more, meaning that we radiate the expression of the reality of who God is and of what human life is truly intended to be.

We have the righteousness at the core by the Holy Spirit, but now this is learning how to live it out, where I'm joined with the Lord, His character, which is now mine, and I get to learn to express it more and more in the midst of real life.

The wonderful thing about this is it's saying this doesn't mean having to go off to some monastery someplace. Of course, they've got all these issues too between them. Our sister used to say, "People think that nuns and monks and priests are these perfect people. She said, "You've got to live in a monastic community to realize that they're no different from anybody else in terms of the issues that come up and that they have to deal with. They carry all of the human issues right in.

And the whole idea of escaping the world and its ungodliness by moving into a monastery is a total illusion, and it will be totally disappointing. But here, this is saying I can use the issues that come up in daily life to further my habit of trusting the Lord to live out His character, which is now mine, in specific areas with real people around me that I impact every day or frequently.

And what is also habit-forming is not just the old. If I keep doing the old, it gets deeper and deeper, easier and easier to fall into, as we've been talking about. And I hear the Lord less and less on that issue and in general. But the opposite is true. The more I make the choice to trust the Lord, to approach it His way this time, at first it can be very hard because it's not my habit, and all the pressure of habit is the other way.

But as I trust Him, as Steve said, to express kindness instead of anger, "How can I help instead of "How could you again, what's habit-forming is trusting the Lord as well. The more I trust Him for a specific area, the more my habit of trusting Him is. That's the sanctification, and I'm being set apart for His intended purpose to express what is the new me, the new creation, which is the Lord, and to give others the blessing of living with someone who shows forth the Lord instead of repeating what I don't want to be on the other end of and maybe have been, but I end up doing the same thing to other people.

And this is how to get free, choice by choice. And again, the adversary is there saying, oh, it's taken you so long to develop that habit. It's going to take forever to get out. And that is not true, because God Himself is at work in you both to will and to work for His good pleasure. That's Philippians 2. Notice, to will and to work, step one, step two. And so the power is good pleasure. That's step three. We'll get there.

The power that we just celebrated, the power that raised Jesus from the dead, is there available to each one of us to make the choice to trust the Lord, to express His character according to His words. Instead, using the example of anger, instead of anger, the end of Ephesians 4, being kind, tenderhearted, forgiving each other, just as God in Christ is forgiving you, and laying down your life type of love, just as you're loved by the Father and the Son. The more I choose to say, thank You, Lord, that is my new character, and I choose to trust You to express it here, the more that habit will grow. The more I grow in trusting Him in general, that's good news.

Now, as we're talking about masters and we're talking about slave and servant, part of what this points out is we try to be free of being mastered. And what this is pointing out is, no, you can't. You can be free from one master, but that determination to be free from the rightful master will master you.

There was a popular singer years ago, Bob Dylan, and he was popular because he was singing things extolling sexual immorality and so forth. And then he became a believer, and then he came out with a Christian album. He wrote a lot of songs, and it was very good material. And he called it Slow Train Coming, meaning you're going to have to face the Lord. And probably the most popular song on that was, "You got to serve somebody. You got to serve somebody. It may be the devil or it may be the Lord, but you got to serve somebody." And that's absolutely spot on. That's the deal here.

The issue is not whether or not we have a master. The issue is the character of the master. An ungodly master makes slaves of people and uses them for the master's selfish purposes and tends to master them harshly and maybe even brutally. But a godly master makes people useful for furthering life and giving life to others in a way that satisfies us because it's what we're created for.

Yes, and it frees us up. That's the thing, sanctification. It frees us up to become what we're capable of becoming because of our created nature, to be created in the image of God, being created to be living expressions of who the true God is. And that's the difference.

But because in this world ungodly mastery is widespread, even in the best of settings, and going back into the 70s, Eldridge Cleaver, who was leading the Black Panthers, became a believer. And he went, and I'm trying to think because there were two, and I'm thinking whether it was Eldridge or his cohort, whichever it was, went into some international civil rights sort of thing, and he was ragging away about how awful things are in the United States, and he was virtually laughed out of the place. And the other people there from all over the world said, you are deluded. You don't have the first clue of how good you have it. Yes, there are defects. Yes, there are deplorable things. But you have it much better than most of the world.

And it's the character of people. Yeah, we've got all the same stuff, but what do you do with it? And the issue is not, and when Cleaver, or whoever it was, made that statement, the whole tone was a tone of lawlessness. It was all fighting against what is, fighting against the system. And that doesn't... The anger of man does not achieve the righteousness of God. James 1:20. It's not what we're fighting against. It's what we're fighting for. Now, for fighting against true evil and ungodliness, yes. But the point was, it's not a matter of whether or not you have a master. The come on with sin is you can be free from having a master.

And that's where Paul goes next. He says, "When you were slaves of sin, you were free with regard to righteousness. And that's not true freedom, to be free from real life, if you put it that way, free from being the glorious being that you have been created to be and you have the potential to become. But the command of sin is being free from that in an effort to try to be free and pointed.

Nobody is free. Everybody is ruled by something. And what is it? So this is all the reason why to take advantage of the opportunity every time we have it to do the new that we committed ourselves to in principle in taking step one, the change of heart commitment, objective, what I'm fighting for and fighting against. Why fighting? Because it's life and death. And now we're talking about what I'm serving to further in practice, and in order to pursue and attain, to a significant degree, what I'm fighting for now that I've changed my allegiance.

And we've noted in these different steps, the key verb is present. And that shows up right in the middle of verse 19, that I choose who I present myself to, and what I present myself to do, what it's for. And I can either just be passive, and in which case I am presenting myself, though I don't realize it, I'm presenting myself to further the old, to deepen it, and to continue. I'm yielding my will. I'm yielding my will to what an objective is, and now I'm yielding my service to further one thing or another. There are an infinite number of specifics, but they all fall into one category or the other. There are only two.

And this really emphasizes that it's not just behavior change. I'm presenting myself to the Lord to live out the new life He has died to give me that is now mine. It is my will at the core. This is new life from the core of my being on out.

And part of that, remember, last week, we took a session to do an intermediate and an additional topic that's very germane, and that is God's determinations that we be free will allies of His. He does not want automatons. He does not want slaves. He wants free will allies. And so here I have the choice with whatever specific habit we're talking about to present myself to the Lord to live out what is now His will and mine at the core and develop a new lifestyle. And each time I choose to present myself to Him for that, that habit grows, of trusting Him, of presenting myself to Him, of showing Him forth. And that's so encouraging, and it really is noticeable to the people I impact.

Verse 20 to 23 is about what is the fruit, and that's what Paul said. Fruit is the word that Paul uses in the Greek text. **"What fruit were you reaping from the things of which you are now ashamed? The end result of these things is death."**

And biblical shame is not the dishonoring your family, your nation, your society, whatever it is. And it's not personal embarrassment. It's the shame of defeat, shame of missing out on life, and, in that, the shame of not fulfilling what I've been created for, to show the Lord forth, to partner with the Lord.

Now we turn to the other side of freedom, true freedom, not the false freedom of the corruption, of the freedom of fighting off, furthering a godly cause. But now, being free from sin and bound in service to God, you have your fruit and its outcome, sanctification. When we talk about that, accomplishing God's intent, fulfilling the purpose and potential of my being created in God's image and God's purpose for me, and the end result, eternal life.

Now, what is that? And **for the earned wages of sin is [death]** that you get what you deserve. You blow God off, you wind up separate from Him, but you're winding up separate from the source of all life. And if you cut yourself off from the source of life, what have you got? Death.

You hear, we've got various lights around here as it's getting darker outside, and you probably see the change in the color and brightness of the image here because we're not getting the light from outside coming at us as much. But we've got light. Pull the plug on one of those lamps and you don't have light. You've got a device which is capable of producing light and designed to do so, but only if it has electrical power coursing through it, energizing it and causing it to do what it is designed, invented to do. And that's exactly the way it is.

We are to glorify God. We are to radiate the information about who God really is. People should look at us and think, wow, that's what life should be. That's what God must be like. This is the whole point of the incarnation. You have the whole Old Testament, 1,300 pages of information, including historical examples. But then you get the New Testament, and it's God saying, "Okay, let Me show you what I've been telling you about. Philip's question to Jesus, "Show us the Father. "Have I been with you so long and you haven't recognized?

I say and do what the Father shows Me. It's not like the professor saying, "Let me show you what I have in mind," as he erases the blackboard. God really does show what He had in mind.

And our lifestyle can be contagious. It can show forth the Lord in a way that makes others hungry for Him. And notice what glorifying God does. People will volunteer freely in the day of Your glory, somewhere in the prophets.

And what happens when people see what they know is the way life should be? They want to learn more about it, and they want to help further it. And that's what we're called and privileged to do.

And what is the outcome of this? Interestingly enough, the outcome: eternal life.

Wait a minute. You know, in Romans 2, those who through perseverance in doing good seek for glory and to be what they should be, and honor, the result of being useful, and immortality, not cryogenic storage but leaving a lasting impact. There's a prevailing Jewish concept, which has some validity, but unfortunately it's sadly incomplete, the idea that, as far as any sort of afterlife, that life after death is the reputation that you leave behind for what your life was about. As I say, there's some real value in that, but it's sad, people who think that's all there is.

But the outcome, the end result of all of this: eternal life. Jesus tells us what eternal life is. Most people think eternal life means afterlife, means going to heaven after we die. Eternal life is then and there. They don't understand that eternal life is available here and now.

Jesus tells us what eternal life is in the so-called high priestly prayer, John 17. After the Upper Room Discourse, as Jesus is about to head to Gethsemane and give Himself up for crucifixion, to pay for our sins so we're reconciled to God judicially, He says, "This is eternal life." Give them eternal life. **"This is eternal life, that they may know You."** This is intimate knowledge. This is the same kind of knowing as the intimacy between a husband and wife, **that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You've sent.**

Now, how is there eternal life here? How is there eternal life in Romans 2? **Those who have perseverance in doing good seek for glory, honor, and immortality.** What? You're becoming acquainted firsthand with godliness by pursuing godly objectives.

Now that we are making godliness happen in practice instead of destroying things, we are getting to know God firsthand. Living righteously helps us to understand God better because of experiencing His life, because of doing the things right that He does. That is what's happening here. We are becoming intimate with God.

It's amazing how much can be accomplished with daily choices in the midst of real life, and that as I learn to present myself to the Lord, not just overall, that's the place to start, but now choice by choice, I'm presenting myself to walk in His character, which is now mine, righteousness. And I am growing the habit of that, of showing that lifestyle. That's the sanctification, where my lifestyle is developing of godly character, being holy. I'm set apart for my intended purpose to show forth the Lord.

And the end result here is eternal life, intimacy with the Lord. I get to partner with Him and get to know Him in the midst of regular life choices. And that is awesome. It doesn't take going off to a mountaintop someplace. It's in the midst of daily life. And that changes these mundane choices and shows that there's much more being accomplished as I trust Him to renounce, not just overall but now in practice, choice by choice. I'm not resorting to the anger this time. I renounce that because I don't want to be mastered by it. I don't want to further that habit.

And the fruit, what is the end result that I'm actually producing? It's not just the, come on, I'm trying to get this person to back off. I'm trying to control this situation, which is overwhelming. It's much more. I've been displaying the adversary, which closes people's ears and their hearts.

Now, choice by choice, I present myself to the Lord to walk in the new, His character, which is mine, righteousness, developing a lifestyle of sanctification, showing Him forth more and more in real life with the real people in my life, and the outcome: eternal life, intimacy with the Lord Himself, closeness. I'm joining Him and expressing Him. It's the closeness that we saw of Jesus with the Father. It's more and more active partnership, more and more seeing what the Father does.

And we see it in Scripture, and then as we trust Him to do it there, we hear more of the nudges of the Spirit of, here's an opportunity to express this. And the encouragement, too, is not to wait till the opportunity is upon you. If we do, we're likely to do the old, but instead to be proactive. Overall, that's the step one of what am I furthering? What am I choosing to embody? Is it the old or is it the new me, the new creation?

But then, am I presenting myself to the Lord as I head into the day, or as I head into known types of interactions where my tendency, the old habit, is to do the old? And most of us, we know the types of situations that bring up that old. And so take time with the Lord overall, and then at the beginning of each day and throughout.

But I'm presenting myself to You. This person really irks me, really threatens me. And I present myself to You to further and display Your character, Lord, instead of my old approach, which was focused on, guess who, self. I want to have that person back off. I want to control the situation instead of... and the fruit that it's produced is death, separation, not showing forth the Lord, and isolation for me, even shame that I'm, oh no, I did it again. And it's very easy to stop reading Scripture at that point and not wanting to talk with the Lord because I did it again, and He can't... He must be judging me, even though He says no condemnation. I would be condemning, so surely He is, instead of saying, this is what He says, and it's true. Thank You, Lord. Thank you, Lord, for Your grace so I can grow. And then step by step by step, I can grow that.

And what's the fruit? It means that, first of all, my success, no matter what the other person is doing, my success is responding to the Lord and bringing His presence there. Even if they don't see it, they fight it off, they call it something else, before the Lord, He sees the heart and sees what's really going on. It is success in building the habit of showing Him forth as I, choice by choice, change.

And as Erica was pointing out, if we're just passive, we're not really waiting for the opportunity. We're just going with the flow, and passivity leads to reactivity. Because then something comes, then more likely when the opportunity to do the new comes up, it's going to come primarily in the form of temptation to do the old, because the old is how we respond or react to situations. And we're likely to do the old if we're just cruising. But if we are proactively looking for opportunities to do the new, then we have a much better chance of success in spotting opportunities when they come and acting on them.

Now, the header in our announcement said we'd be looking at why it's important to be doing the step two, and how what has changed, what has God done that enables us, sets us free to do it. That actually will be the beginning of next time. That's the first part of Romans 7, and we will cover that. And then where do we find ourselves at that point? And that's the rest of Romans 7, both what is the dilemma that we find ourselves in as we try to do this, and what we actually accomplish by taking step two, even when it doesn't seem to succeed, doesn't seem to issue in the actual results that we're striving after. And that's what step three will enable. Step three enables consistency.

Yeah, right. It's not... we can make huge progress. We can make huge progress, but with significant frustration, and we break out of that frustration into a much more consistency. But the key for tonight is why it is so important that we be taking the step two, the repeated choices, moment by moment, to take advantage of the opportunities to do the new instead of the old.

Again, the questions, because it's saying, what am I actually choosing? Do I want to be mastered by the habit of anxiety? What do I want to be mastered by? What habit do I want to deepen? What's the fruit? What's the result in my life as well as in those I impact? What's the real result? Not the come-on of the life I'm trying to get from this, but what's the real impact, the real result? Do I give in to serving the evil slave master, or do I take up the opportunity to contribute my service to furthering the infinitely good, life-giving master? We'll get into more practical examples of these.

Let's pray.

> Oh, Lord, thank You that You are practical. Thank You that You know that intent is not enough. Good intent isn't enough. Even earnest prayer, expecting You to do it all, isn't enough because it's not Your way. Thank You that You call us to participate actively. You've created us to rule, and You give us rule over our own lives, over what we coddle in our minds, what we say, what the attitudes are, what we do. And thank You, Lord, that those very areas become a place where we get to know You, and where we can make the choices to trust You, choice by choice, to develop a new lifestyle that gives You joy and us joy and satisfaction, and impact on those around us.

> Lord, may we be alert to what the real choices are we're making, not just the come-on, and learn to be proactive in wise choice instead of just passive and reactive and keep furthering the old. Thank You, Lord, for new life and that You are there in us both to will and to work for Your good pleasure, Your power that raised Jesus from the dead available to us by the power of the Holy Spirit to develop this life's new lifestyles that radiate You choice by choice.

> And thank You that we get to know You deeply and intimately through this. In Your name, amen.