> Oh, Lord, thank you that you are here wherever in the world each of us are. Thank you for the great blessing of being able to meet in Your presence to encourage one another to learn from You and to pray and be part of one another's lives. Lord, we thank You that You are with us and You are good all the time. Lord Jesus, we ask that You will teach every one of us that You'll open our ears to hear You and our eyes to see You. Lord, thank You for the good, good gift of male-female and of male-female relationships and marriage and family. And Lord, You know better than we how it's been co-opted in so many ways in such hurtful and destructive ways. And Lord, we ask to learn from You so that we can walk in and encourage what is on Your heart as You are the creator of us as male and female and the creator of marriage and the creator of relationships and the enablers. And You give us the wisdom in Your words for good, good, redemptive relationships. Lord, may we all learn from You and may we grow in our relationship with You as all of us are part of the bride of Christ. And what a wonder to be loved by You forever. Thank You, Lord. Please encourage every one of us in Your name. Amen.

**Introduction**

As you know, all of us have hopes and dreams and fears of male, female, of relationships, of marriage, based on culture, family, media. We have so many different thoughts, ideas, hopes, desires, fears, based on so much input. And we realized when we got married almost 49 years ago that though we had grown up in good families, we had not seen what we knew the Lord was calling for. In fact, no one has seen a perfect marriage. Not even our children. Our children certainly did not. We raised them. You pray for us, and we'll pray for you. And they did, and they still pray for us. And they've assured us that we've grown. And if your kids tell you you've grown, you have. Children can read us like a book.

As I said, we're coming up on our 49th anniversary. And as Steve says, it's a good beginning. And connected with that, it literally says if you're looking to the Lord, trusting the Lord, turning to the Lord constantly, repeatedly, it will just get better and better. And it's an exponential ramp up with plenty of growth.

How else does it get better? A friend said today marriage is sanctification on the fast pace, on the fast track. And it is. It's taking a lot of what we've learned in our heads and now it's time to really work it out in the lab of life, in the spiritual warfare, as the flesh lusts against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh. The beauty of marriage is it's a cage fight in the sense that you're both by the spirit fighting against the flesh in yourself and the flesh in your spouse. And the Lord is the victor. And we're assured of victory. And we will enjoy that by degrees as we do it the Lord's way. And it's awesome. What we've learned is we need to learn from the Lord what this looks like. He's the originator of male and female, marriage, and relationships between the genders. He gives us so much wisdom in His word about who He's created us to be, both the commonality and the specialty, and how to go about it. As we really learn from Him and walk it out, it results in so much healing and growth and can really become a showplace of the Lord.

We're addressing this to people in all positions of life. For those who are single or dating and hoping to be married, headed toward marriage, this can be so helpful in providing vision and preparation that you can start developing in your own life now in relationships in general. It's never too early to start learning this, no matter how far in the distant future it may be. So many times, especially here at Stanford, people prepare for a career but don't prepare for good relationships and marriage. We just somehow expect that making a U-turn at the altar we'll know what to do!

Anything worthwhile is worth preparing for, gaining the Lord's vision. For those who are married, this is wonderful for more inspiration, growth, and healing. For those who are single or single again and may never be married again, and for all of us, this is a place where all of us can grow in our wonder and understanding of who we are as the bride of Christ. Our worship of Him, our growing in that relationship, and also equipping to pray for and help others who are in the midst of working it out in this life. There is so much benefit no matter what your position in life is. And all of us will have opportunities to encourage and pray for others.

Our society is afraid of commitment and afraid of marriage for good reason. Those of us who really grasp the Lord's good plan and go for it with everything that we've got—whether marriage or even just good male-female relationships—can telegraph the Lord's presence to people longing for the real thing but have given up hope that it actually is possible. So Jesus said, "We'll be known by the agape, the self-sacrificial love for one another," which telegraphs to the people around us the presence of the Lord Himself, because we're learning to love as He loves. Every bit of growth in this area is part of our joining with Him in His redemptive work in this broken world. I encourage every one of us, no matter where we are in life, to be listening intently and praying to the Lord with each session today, to be changed, to welcome, as James 1 says toward the end, "to receive the word implanted, which is able to save your soul." The word is implanted in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, but it's our choice to receive it and walk it out with the Lord. As we do that, He is growing us. It's not coming to faith, but growing in the practice of growing in the Lord's beautiful character and being part of His work.

Listen and go back to the text to grow each session. As Hebrews points out to us, we are in the position of the fulfillment of the promise in Jeremiah 31:33: "This is the new covenant. I will make with them after that time. I will put my laws in their hearts, write my laws in their hearts, and I'll put it in their minds, and I shall be their God, and they'll be my people." Because He has put His word in our hearts, our core determination in life is to live out God's word. We'll have to learn what that is in many regards and find out what the implications are for applying it in our lives. But it's there. He puts it in our mind, but that doesn't mean automatically living it out.

Tonight, we have the fun of looking at Genesis 1 and 2, the only glimpse that we have before the fall, before all the brokenness, of who are you? You have to know who you are in the Lord in order to bring blessing with the Lord to other people and who this other person is. We start with the commonality of who we are, and that's what we bring to each other.

In Genesis 2, we'll be looking at the up close and personal where we get into looking more at the distinctive, not only what's in common, but what are the specialties that each of us as male and female bring to those relationships and to marriage. As you really recognize both, it then becomes a setting in which to really bless with the Lord. That's what we'll be looking at tonight.

Next week, we'll get into Genesis 3, what went terribly wrong and what the impact is on male and female. We'll also be looking at strategies so that knowing that, how can we be strategic in the Lord not to be had by it, but in fact to be redemptive. Next week we'll be getting into that. This week we have the joy of understanding what the Lord has built into us that is still there, even though it now gets perverted in a lot of ways.

**Genesis 1: Our call and commission**

We start with God's creation of human beings. Genesis 1:26: "God said, let us make man in our image according to our likeness and let them rule over the living being and the earth." Verse 27: "God created man in his own image. In the image of God, he created him. Male and female, he created them." Verse 28: "God blessed them and said to them, be fruitful and multiply, fill the earth, subdue it, and rule over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the sky, everything that moves on the earth."

In the manner in which God does everything, and this pattern is throughout Genesis 1, there are three aspects to everything God does. He starts with deliberate intentional purpose. He then proceeds to execute that purpose in practice and then imparts the resultant blessing to the intended beneficiaries. That ABC is the absolute foundation of everything God does, and it imparts the structure to everything heHe does.

There is a step one, two, and three. The first is that He is the one who does the ruling, the managing, to use a contemporary term that maybe is a little easier for us to comprehend and leaves out some of the confusion that the term rule can bring in. In the first iteration of the one ABC, God is the administrator, the ruler, that's in the creation there. In the second iteration, the beneficiary of the first is invited to become the ruler, the manager, in that second iteration. Finally, that one becomes a teacher of other managers.

This is Jesus' ministry. The first iteration is He becomes to work out in practice the Father's will to give God life to people, to the picture He's created in His image, and He blesses people. This is Jesus' ministry to the multitudes. Some of those people say, "hey, I would like to be like you. Teach me." So they become disciples. They're called out of the crowd, the multitude, into discipleship. He trains them. When they are ready, He then invites them to call others. As they are doing what He's teaching them to do, it's benefiting third parties. Some of them will look to the disciples and say, hey, teach me to do what you're doing. Then the disciple becomes an apostle, one who is sent out to give life and to teach. Jesus' ministry enables us to see this paradigm quite clearly. That is the paradigm. It's the same paradigm for the family. It's the way God does everything. There is often a fourth step, and Genesis 1 shows that. You have the first three steps, the result, the first three days of creation, the third day has two parts. One is the separation and association that then results in ongoing plant growth, food supply for the living beings. You have the three development steps, and then you have a fourth resulting step. It continues on indefinitely. The second three days has to do with moving bodies, the essential things. It starts with the celestial luminaries, which give guidance to those on Earth and light, and then creation of the animals and human beings to manage them.

Then we get to, or specifically the third part, you get to humans, and then we get to the ongoing result of the ongoing relationship with God.

By the way, Man is God's name for the human race. We use it also for an individual male human being, and that in our gender confusion today really causes lots of problems for people. But if you read Genesis 5:1, it talks about "the day that God created man and named them man". So it's God's name for us. Maybe it would help simplify things. It's capitalized the M; it's a proper name.

**Created in His image: 3-dimensions**

So, Genesis 1:27 "Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness".

"In our image": An image is a representation. The image is only as good as it represents and expresses accurately what it is an image of, what it represents. That's the issue with us. Before the fall, no problem. But after the fall, we still are incarnations of God's image. But we can use that and the attributes of it to propagate life or to destroy it. But that's next week. Let's enjoy our one and only look without that problem.

"According to our likeness": likeness has a functional implication, similar to image, but likeness. Be like God in what we are and what we represent and to be like God in what we do. Go and let them rule, then manage in a godly manner to manage benevolently the lives of animals and the earth as their habitat.

Then we come to, from the purpose, the objective, now to actually implementing it in practice. Verse 27, "God created man in his own image. In the image of God, he created him. Male and female, he created them." Three aspects. We always get. All right, God created man in his own image. Only God can look at us and see in us his own image, and see a representation, an expression of who he is, his own image. Our being created in the image of God says something special and unique about our relationship to God. We are the only beings, of all the beings of the creation, we are the only ones who have that unique relationship to God. In the image of God, He created it. That sounds redundant, but it's not. In the image of God. Now God is referred to in the third person, not the first person. His own image. That's a first person reference. In the image of God, that's a third person reference. This observer is not God, and the observer is not the human being. Who is it? We have all the animals. People have said, "well, the angels". But the angels are never referenced in Genesis 1, so that's not the point of the text. We can't say that's what the text teaches. The living beings that we are commissioned to manage benevolently are designed by God to look at us and see a representation of God that they can relate to because we are physically incarnate beings.

It just ended a 13-plus year amazing season in our lives as we just buried the remains of our beloved dog Regal—100 pounds of pure love. He was absolutely amazing. He was unique. Dogs have particular nature. On extremely rare occasions, there is a dog that is, and we're not saying this just because he's our dog. We've had other dogs. We've known other dogs in addition to our own, but it was the closest relationship I have ever had to any animal. A little later, we'll get back to that... The animals are supposed to look to us to represent God and to serve God benevolently in their lives.

"Male and female He created them." Now, we are looking at each other. And as we look at each other, God looks at all of us, regardless of gender, and sees a living representation of Himself. Animals look at us, regardless of gender, and see the same thing, a living representation of God, whom they look to bless them with those attributes. But we look and we see a distinction within the commonality, a vital distinction, and a distinction that is part of our being incarnations of the image of God. That is the distinction of being either male or female. Everything else we're told about is the same with us. The relationship to God, the relationship to the animals, it's the same. We have that in common. But we have a distinction that each one of us individually is either male or female, and that maleness in relationship to the femaleness, that femaleness in relationship to maleness expresses the vital aspect of who God is, the relational aspect.

These are all attributes within the Godhead. When we get so far as to discover the triune nature of God, we find that God the Father carries the portfolio for purpose. It's their common purpose: Father, Son, and Spirit. But the Son carries the portfolio for rule, for management, for execution of that purpose. And the Spirit carries the portfolio for imparting life to others. All of this is so that we collectively, as the human race, can express God. We do so individually, but we also do so in relation with each other, which is our particular emphasis tonight and continuing today.

**Genesis 1:28**

"God blessed them..." To bless is to imbue with life. There's a whole range of aspects of that, but blessing is always imparting life in some way. "God said to them, be fruitful and multiply." Those are not identical. Fruitfulness has to do with a relationship. Multiplying is a product of the relationship, of a fruitful relationship. Fill the earth. Multiply, fill the earth. Propagate, not merely human bodies, propagate the incarnate presence of God by representation on earth and spread that all over the created world we live in. Subdue it and rule. Subdue means to take charge by force if necessary. It is not possible to manage what one does not have control of, at least control in the sense that's relevant to the management responsibility and endeavor. This is before the fall. This is subdued the way God does. Subduing by cracking skulls does not enter in Genesis 1. That doesn't come until Genesis 4, the first murder. But God subdues by winning hearts. And that's our objective. Our objective comes out of Genesis 1. There are necessary accommodations that come out as a result of Genesis 3. But this is the plan. This is the program. This is the design.

Now, we're going to wait until next week to get into Genesis 3. But it's important to state, even at this point, that the fall is not a failure of the plan. Among other indicators we have, we are told that Jesus was the lamb slain "before the foundation of the world." The sacrifice of Jesus, of the Son of God, to save us from sin was planned before the world was even made, let alone before there were any human beings. God is not playing catch-up ball. What He's doing is He created us on one level. We are not trying to get back to the garden. That's not good enough. He created us on that level in the garden. And in order then to take us to a much higher level, He had to let us drop first.

Think about the gymnastic spring. The run first. The descent onto the springboard and then the catapult to much higher than the run-up ramp. And there's so many things like that in this world that illustrate that. But that's what He's doing. And we'll touch on that more later. But if God simply created a perfect world and put us in it and left it exactly that way, then with no option to trash it, then we would be like the angels. We'd be perfect, but only because that's the way we were created, not because that's the way we chose to be. The fall means we lose what we had in order to choose far greater things. And that is to be in an intimate relationship with God by free will choice. His choice to offer reconciliation and our choice to accept the offer. It's not true that "Christians are not perfect, just forgiven". The whole world is forgiven. Christians have accepted the gift of forgiveness and are receiving the benefits that go way beyond forgiveness.

What does this have to do with male-female relationships? A lot. This is a very dense text looking way back to the beginning, and there's so much communicated in a few words. First, we note in verse 26, "Let us make Man in our image". Hebrew has not only singular but dual and plural. The dual is for things that go in pairs like ears and eyes, but is not for pencils and rubber bands and dogs and cats and that sort of thing. It's for things that occur naturally only as two. But the plural implies that there's probably three or more. There's at least three. We know from farther on in Scripture that, in fact, there were three: the Father, the Son, and the Spirit.

Early rabbis, in their writing, had a strong suspicion that there was not only the Father but another Son figure of the unity of God as well as the Holy Spirit. But once Jesus arrived, that disappeared from rabbinic writings. When the Trinitarian nature of God became an essential point of Christianity, it suddenly became unpopular in rabbinical circles, understandably. The beautiful thing is, as we're created in His image, He is three in one. Three, from a human standpoint, usually doesn't work well in a fallen world. "Two's company, three's a crowd, four's too many, five's not allowed!" There's usually conflict with three post-fall. But what we have in our God is complete unity.

The Father is the source, who sets forth the way things should be. The Son is the executive who, in complete unity with the Father, brings it to pass. We know from Genesis, John 1, Colossians 1, and other places, that Jesus was the creator. He was the one who actually executed the plan, not the Father, not the Spirit. The Spirit only brings to mind what Jesus has said. It's complete unity. It's unity of being, unity of purpose, and we are created in His image to be able to have that kind of unity, which is not natural to human beings post-fall.

If you are reading Philippians or Ephesians, book after book, it talks about, in John 17, Jesus' prayer just before going to Gethsemane and the cross. He's praying that we will be one as He and the Father are one. Only the Lord, as we walk in His image that he's given us and are filled with His Spirit, only then can we develop that kind of unity that is not squashing who you are, but is a free will expression of who you are. That's part of the goal in a true marriage with the Lord, the man, and the woman. It's a three-way alliance where, as you learn to walk in the image of God, you're united. The closer we are to the Lord, the closer we get together and the more unified we are in walking in step with Him and with each other. That's a lifetime worth of growth. Every bit of growth results in blessing. We don't have to wait till heaven; there's so much blessing with every baby step of growth.

In a two-page handout that we sent you just before class tonight, session 26 of the class notes page 8, you have that illustrated and a note of the responsibilities as we get into Genesis 2. The wonderful thing here and the encouragement to every one of us is to know who you are. Know that you have been created in the image of God Himself to show Him forth. He's given us that capacity, and now we're filled with His character as we receive Jesus. It's the Holy Spirit who dwells in our hearts. We have His beautiful character within. We are able to grow in displaying the image of God, to give joy to the Lord, fulfilling what we're created for, and also to bless one another.

Everything that God does is to bless others. There's not one ounce of "it's all about me." We have the privilege of bringing His image to other people, animals, this earth, and to give joy to the Lord Himself. That's where He goes with that center part where the word "create" comes up three times. In Hebrew, which was for a long time a verbally transmitted language, you are probably aware of Hebrew dualism that often in the Psalms and other places things will be repeated two times, but from slightly different aspects. That's true even with the Genesis account. We've got Genesis 1 looking at God creating, and then Genesis 2, not a different creation, the same one, but from a slightly different aspect where He's looking at the creation of man and woman up close.

Generally, those pairs, the first is functional. Something happens or something is the case. The second is what results from it—the facts and the implications or the effect. Something about who God is or how God works and then how we are blessed through that. He's got reiterated three times, "created," which God created, which is a Hebrew way of huge underlining, saying, if you get nothing else, get this. This is the key, the most important part. This is the apex. Then he starts with, and that word "create" is very special. In chapter one, He created and then He works with what He created. Create, made, made, made. Create, made, made, made. The points of creation are where God injects from outside the system to bring it to a new level that could not be developed just within that system. It introduces something new that only God can introduce. It cannot be arrived at by working with what's already there. This underlines us as new creations, as believers, that He has injected His own life by the Holy Spirit from outside into each of us. This lifts us to a much higher level of now being able to radiate the presence of God Himself.

The first create is we are standing before our Creator, each of us, every day, all the time. We can give Him joy every day in the way that am I trusting Him to show forth His character in the way that I manage, rule, and in the way that I relate, to "be fruitful and multiply." Every day, I have the opportunity to give joy to the Lord as I stand in His presence. Some people will say, "I don't manage very much." But we do. We have far more than we think. We get to manage our mind, our emotions, our inner life, what we do, what we say, how we manage the bodies He's given us, our living space, not to mention work, relationships within the family, outside the family, at the grocery store, wherever you are.

We have the opportunity to display God Himself and to give joy, first of all, to the Lord Himself. We're fulfilling what He created us for. We're growing in that. The second one is what are we showing to observers around us? Then it was just the animals. Were the animals seeing the character of God Himself in the way that we manage, in the way that we relate? Now it's other people as well.

People watch people all the time, far more often. You are watched far more than you know. Don't be creeped out by that. But I've had perfect strangers say, "I've seen you for years out walking." You wonder, what did they see? Wherever I am, I get to bring the presence of God Himself to people who are just observers, not even interacting as well as those who interact.

There's that third part of male-female in relationships with people of the opposite gender. Am I displaying the Lord's beautiful character? It's so easy, especially the closer with a relationship, family or marriage. Those often are the places where we're the most not showing forth the Lord's character. It's easier to do it at church or out in the public sphere where we may be a little concerned about our reputation. But I am created to bring the image of God to those closest of relationships, to manage what's within my sphere of influence in a way that shows the Lord's character. His management is not control that constrains and kills. It's the type of order that enables life to flourish. Is the way that I relate one that enables others to flourish, to be blessed, to impart life? Or am I, as we'll get into in Genesis 3, making it all about me and inadvertently stepping all over other people? This is something that all of us have the opportunity to grow in, no matter what our position of life. If you're single and hoping to be married, the best way to prepare is to practice with the relationships you have now. It's like people wanting to go into missions. What are you doing with the opportunities right where you are? Do you love people from that culture? Are you reaching out, or is it just the idealized view of going to another part of the earth?

It's the same thing with marriage. "Oh, I'd love to be married." Well, how are you treating the people you have now in your circle of influence? That's the place to start practicing, learning to bring the image of God to the people you already have in your life. That's the best preparation for a good marriage. You don't have to wait until you're finding someone to date or anything nearly that far along. This is very key, and there are lots of opportunities right here. We've done counseling right off of this even in the last few days.

Now we'll go on to Genesis 2 because we're moving along on time. We get to do the up close and personal. It's the same creation, but this is the up close and personal looking now at the Lord's special care in creating male and female. As we go through the text, be looking for what has the Lord built into men, into the male human being? What is the purpose, his passion? What does he migrate to as a place to show forth the Lord? And then, the same thing for the woman. What is her purpose?

We've already established we're both of equal highest worth and we treat others that way. We have the image of God in common, but we also have some special areas that we both have, or else we couldn't relate. We are able to relate to the Lord who is the spiritual force. We're able to relate in the management sphere. All of us, men and women, are called to rule, to manage. We're all called to be fruitful and multiply, but to propagate the character of God and image of God. In addition to that commonality, men and women have specialties of areas that we're especially attuned to, that when combined together with the Lord and the two of us, really covers all the bases. If we learn to celebrate that, welcome it, and avail ourselves of it, the relationship is much richer. It's not in terms of words at all. It's just the richer specialties that we get to bring to make a much richer display of the Lord Himself as we relate to one another. Be looking for that as we're in the text, and then we'll really outline it and the implications for it.

Genesis 2:4, we look at the Lord's creation of the first man. "This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created". And it's really "generations". It's what did the heavens and the earth produce? And what it produced was: the living beings that the Lord raised up out of the ground. It started with inorganic material and resulted in animals. "No shrub of the field was yet in the earth, no plant of the field had yet sprouted, for the Lord God had not sent rain upon the earth, and there was no man to cultivate the ground". Literally just serve the ground. The ground's there, but it's not producing fruit yet, because God needs to provide something, and somebody needs to manage something. To cultivate the ground is literally to serve the ground, and cultivate is a good extension of that. So provision and management.

In verse 7, "the Lord God formed man from the dust of the ground, breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living being", literally a living soul. This begins with the provision and then infusion of influence. This is the breath of life, not the Holy Spirit, but physical breath, which illustrates the spiritual on the physical level, but this is physical.

The Lord God planted a garden toward the east in Eden, placed the man whom He had formed, and out of the ground, He caused all the trees and so forth, and there were rivers. The significance of the rivers is these are opportunities to propagate the garden. Civilization moves down rivers, as gardens with well-watered areas are crucial, especially in regions like the Middle East and California. Life propagates where there is water, and there are also some special things that Adam will discover when he does go along those rivers.

In verse 15, the Lord God took the man and put him into the garden to cultivate and keep it, literally to serve it and to guard it. A garden is not just a place where nice plants grow, etc. It needs; it requires care and it needs protection. And aA garden is specifically a protected place, often enclosed by a walled enclosure. Generally, it's a stone wall to keep out predators and marauders. And so lifeLife always needs to be served and guarded.

The Lord God commands the man, verse 16, "From any tree of the garden". It's also every tree of the garden. The same word implies any and it also implies every. I think "from any tree" lessens the main point. "Sure, pick any one you like". But I think the point is from every tree of the garden, you may eat freely. Enjoy the abundance. Enjoy the variety without limit, except one tree. "From the tree of the knowledge of good and evil [a tree identified by its unique effect] you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat from it, you shall surely die."

So now we have protection. We have protection and virtually infinite provision. Every tree that is pleasing to the sight and good for food, except one that is not good. And we find later, it is good for food, and it is attractive, but what is different about it is what God has said about it, which is not possible to know except by revelation. And the only reason to make this distinction is because God has said it, and that's really important, that just observing and evaluating and comparing with what is evident to the natural senses about this tree will not lead to the vital, fatal distinction. Only the awareness that God has said this is an exception and trusting Him that the exception is good and provides protection. The man and woman will be protected if and only if the man keeps them heeding this warning.

Notice that the Lord gives the man the commandment before the woman ever comes on the scene. That part of his charge is to protect. From whom and what? From himself. From his own choice. Listening to what God says protects life. When we think we know better, it destroys life. And we'll get into that next week.

But if you look at the purpose statement, the Lord has created the man with a deep passion and purpose of providing, developing, protecting, and serving. Man, or Adam, is tied with the earth, which is adamah. He's made of the dust. He's there to serve the earth. And again, now we're talking about grammatical genders, not living being genders, but Adam, man, is a masculine noun, while the ground specifically emphasizes the capacity to produce fruit, which is feminine. As we'll note later, it is the feminine form of Adam's name.

Now we look at the making of the first woman, verse 18. The Lord God said, "It is not good for the man to be alone." Up to this point, we have "good" in Genesis 1. Good, good, good, good, good, good. Very good. But now, between the six goods and the very good, there's a "not good." It's not good for the man to be alone.Loneliness is part of it, but it's not good for the man to be solitary.

But He does not just need company. First of all, he will need to discover that he needs human company and not just company with the animals. The most fulfilling animal husbandry that anybody has ever experienced was Adam's before the fall. Notice he says, "I will make him a helper suitable for him." Legitimate translation, traditional translation, a helper. But it is more than just a helper. In contemporary English, we think of a helper as an inferior. No! This term is a particular kind of helper—an ally. It is a military term in most of its application. More specifically, it is used mostly of God as the ally of His people in warfare. So nothing demeaning about this, but rather, high calling.

We have to recognize that this attribute of woman is a very high-level essential attribute of God and ally and the suitable for him, corresponding to him. It's not just that she's what he needs, but she corresponds to him. It's like our kind of awkward old English phrase "over against." That is two that face each other, and their relationship is in that face to face, whatever the implications are of the relationship between the two.

Now, what does the Lord do? The Lord had formed. Don't worry about the sequence of events here because the formed here can be just as equally grammatically had formed. It doesn't say when. We don't have contradictory sequence in the creation account between Genesis 1 and Genesis 2. The relationship between Genesis 1 and Genesis 2 is not chronological sequence. Genesis 1 is the basic procedure. Genesis 2 goes back and reexamines portions from a different perspective. This is what was going on personally, what's going on relationally.

The Lord brings the various animals to the man "to see what he would call to them". It's not just what label he'd slap on them. It's how he would identify them distinctly, individually, uniquely, and invite them into relationship. I experienced this wonderfully with Regal, the dog whose season we have just graduated from. Graduated with great delight, but treasuring as we move on without him. When I picked him, I had gone and gotten acquainted with him and his five brothers when they were six weeks old. I observed and handled each one, playing with them and so forth and picked my one. I was checking them out by observation. And then, by manipulation. I did things like pick them up, put them on my head, and rock them, to see how they responded to that sort of thing. I put them over on their backs and cradled them in my arm. That eliminated one right away; he was determined not to be put on his back. The breeder mentioned that he would be a real handful, which wasn't what I was looking for. I was looking for relationships. And I got it. He would call to them and elicit a response.

As I was leaving, because I had to go and come back a week later to let the dam teach her puppies not to bite. She does that in the seventh week. If you take the puppy at six weeks, it takes seven months to teach the puppy, but she teaches them in one week. Anyway, so I was leaving and they said, "does he have a name?" And I said, "yes, and he's heard it many times." "Well, what is it? We can use it." I said, "you could. But it's important for establishing the master-dog relationship. It is important that he knows that this is my name for him, not just his name. And so, I will announce his name when I come back to pick him up. Meanwhile, he has heard the name only from me, and he knows it is a unique part of his relationship to me. He does not hear it otherwise". This was new to them. They're very knowledgeable with dogs, but of course, there's always more to learn about everything.

The big thing in my calling Regal was I was looking to see how he responded to me. The distinguishing thing was towards the end of playing and manipulating and so forth, I took each puppy as I checked them out and held the puppy up eyeball to eyeball with me to see how the dog reacted to direct presentation. All the other puppies, except Regal and one of his brothers, I was sitting on a low wall, which they couldn't see over, kind of a patio area. But when I had him up, all the other ones were interested in looking at what was beyond the wall. It was down to two puppies very quickly because these two were willing to go eyeball to eyeball with me. Regal, particularly, was more interested in me and relating to me than he was in observing other new stuff.

This is what Adam was doing; he was establishing a relationship. The Native Americans did this with horses. A young boy would go out, he'd observe, he'd pick a horse, and he would spend a long time around that horse, gradually getting the horse acquainted and eventually would call to it the name and establish a relationship. The relationship was verbal; it was not physical constraint. "Whatever the man called a living creature, that was his name." The man did this, and there was not found an ally corresponding to it. The thing that was missing was none of them had that unique attribute of being incarnations of the image of God. They were all incarnations of God's creative work, and they were beautiful, but they could not transcend God. They're mere animal level. They could not go higher. They have souls, so there's a personal relationship. Some animals you get very, very personal with; some you can't.

I had experience growing up. I can claim to have cared for millions of animals, technically, because my oldest brother and I raised these for 12 years. A couple of hundred thousand bees at a time, living six weeks to six months each, so over 12 years. I did have exposure to all kinds of animals. I did not find any personal relationship with the boa constrictor, the rattlesnakes, the owl, the raccoon, the skunk, and almost all kinds of animals that we had and actually kept in their home. But the relationship with Regal was truly unique and way beyond anything with other dogs that we had, and I think second only to my horse.

It wasn't until I met Erica that I had the reaction that we're about to note with Adam. "So, the Lord God, verse 21, caused deep sleep to fall upon the man. He slept, took one of the ribs, closed up the flesh at that place." The Lord made sure that the man did not know anything about the creation, the making of the woman. It was not his business. That would put him in a position of being like God, which he's not supposed to be in relation to her. "The Lord God fashioned, literally built, a woman from the rib that he'd taken from the man." The significance here is built because he's building a home. He formed the man. It's a pottery term. He made a vessel. He made a container for human life, a functional container.

The container itself is not the point; it's what's in it, what it contains. But here the issue is this is for light, and it's a matter of degree, but that's the distinction. The commonality is he made a container for the man, made a container for the woman. And when she took it, that brought her to the man.

Now note, who did she know before she met the man? Who did she wake up to? How can God bring her to the man if she doesn't connect to God before she connects with the man? Who's the man first connect with? God made the body and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. The man became a living being, became a living soul. He opened his eyes to find himself eyeball to eyeball with God. That's where it started. Both of them, and this is important in looking at lifetime relationships between a man and a woman, both of them got acquainted with God before they got acquainted with each other. Really important. The man says, "This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". Are you kidding? That's not the way the Hebrew reads! It says "this one, at last!" That's the literal Hebrew. "Bone of my bones, flesh of my flesh." She is the same as I am in the fixed things. She is the same as I am essentially in the dynamic aspects of life. "She shall be called woman because she was taken out of man."

There's something we don't catch in the English that's in the Hebrew. They didn't say she should be called out of mom because she was taken out of Adam. No. He says she should be called Isha because she was taken out of Ish. Again, he gives her the feminine form of her name, but it's a name that has never been used for him before. This is man. Adam is man functionally. In all of our important activities as stewards of God's creation, we're functioning as Adam, as man, generically, as human beings.

But this designates a human being relationally and especially in social prominence. He gives her the feminine form of this name, which he's calling himself. What is he saying? Until I came into this relationship with this woman, I was not aware of who I was and now find myself to be relationally. He awakens the relational part of him. It's not that unmarried men are totally relation clueless, but that aspect, there is a great deal of latency in it until this relationship develops it, draws out what is there, and hopefully has had some significant foundational development. Hopefully, he's had some social development before he gets married. It's not always the case, but it makes a huge difference, and it makes for a very difficult marriage if he hasn't.

It's all still his functional activities and relating to animals, and sadly, in some areas, you will find men, especially getting married extra young, where their closest relationship is to the tracker, to the dog, to the horse. And then there's a wife also, which is sad.

> I have a question. It seems like from the passage, what I can gather is that Adam only saw Eve. It's not like he conversed with her. It's not like he watched her for a long time and immediately went, oh, that's her. So other than appearances, how did he get so convinced? Is it because God brought her to him? God brought her to him, and he could tell. First of all, he could tell. Remember, this is the first human being he's seen. So he could tell that right away. But also, this is extremely compressed text. Only the essence. And we're not told how long the time spans are with these various developments. We have no idea about the timetable because in Hebrew, the word day can be used either for 24 hours or for an age. We talk about Einstein's day. We talk about Abraham's day. We don't mean that they lived only 24 hours. We talk about the day of the dinosaurs and so forth. And this passage began, Genesis 2:1, talking about the whole creation account "in the day that the Lord made heaven and earth." So that word day right away is used in all sorts of meanings. We don't know the time frame.

This is condensed like Mark 1. Jesus did this and this, and we're exhausted halfway through, but here we have no idea about the time frame. Again, Genesis 5:1, the whole thing in one verse: "in the day that he made man." The point is that when He created us, He named us. The Lord clues us in the narrative that there's a not good. He's cluing us in that there's an incompleteness that Adam doesn't know at that point. We've got the outside knowledge from the Lord as we're reading the text. But then the Lord sends Adam through this search of getting to know the animals, naming them according to the essence of who they are, calling to them. He's developing relationships, learning how to invite relationships, but as he's doing it, he starts realizing there's a he and a she. "Where's my she?" It's godly loneliness. It's not that there's something terribly wrong. It's just he needs to go through discovering his need for that one particular ally. There aren't other Adams around.

People now will go through the buddy stage where they may be good friends with men or women. They're glad to hang out and go through the companionship. Adam had a perfect relationship with God and perfect work, the most fulfilling work. No gophers. No computers, no bugs in the computer system. He just got to develop and propagate and, totally fulfilling work. The Lord took him through having that wonderful relationship with the Lord, having deeply fulfilling work, and then discovering his need not just for companionship, not just a buddy, but for that particular one other, that ally, who's corresponding to him, totally equal in worth, who brings the presence of God to him just as he does to her, and that they get to join together with the Lord, with each other, in that powerful three-way alliance. And the Lord waited until He knew his needs before wasting a woman on that man. And we've had too many relationships at Stanford where the guy is happy to hang out and read poetry together, all sorts of stuff that seems so romantic. But he's not nearly ready to commit to a lifetime relationship. She's hoping that's where it will go because she's relational from the get-go. But he's just happy with the buddy relationship, the companionship, and isn't ready for that yet. And it would not be good to push him into it. We've seen guys get pushed into it by the girl or by the parents, or by the community, and it's too soon. They're not ready yet. Instead of waiting until they're ready and then to treasure that one special ally.

If you read the beautiful little gem book of Ruth, both Boaz and Ruth have grown in their relationship with the Lord and bring Him to others of all stations of life and in tough relationships. Ruth serves a bitter mother-in-law and is serving so well. And Boaz is treating all of his workers and even foreigners in an honoring way. And they come to recognize that they've been developing the same beautiful character of God. And they recognize that in each other. And there's a special term that they've been developing with other people. There's a special term in Hebrew that is used for both of them at very different points. And it basically implies "a person of very high standing". Hayil, noble, not in the sense of the snooty, but truly noble and basically very godly. And that was true of each of them.

Something a man also has to go through is the relationships with other men, which is important. And I had very good friendships over time with various focuses, which were important and helpful in my growth and my maturity. Over time, I developed a very close friendship with another man who was really serious about the Lord and loved His word. And I got a great deal from that friendship, but there was something about Erica way beyond that, that no other man, no matter how close the friendship, no matter how much we encouraged each other in the Lord, could contribute to my life or that I could contribute to his life, whichever one that I could with Erica because the distinct attributes of male and female and their complementarity, the corresponding to each other, just isn't there until this element is.

And by the way, you will hear us repeatedly using the term male and female distinctives. We avoid the word differences. Differences is divisive. Differences is comparative in a competitive and often negative, evaluative manner. And we find the term distinctives carries more of a connotation of positive attributes and things that can be used to benefit others. Things to be appreciated.

"For this cause, a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and they become one flesh." This statement shows up in three different places in Scripture, each time for a different reason. Here, the cause is the correspondence of male and female, the unique correspondence of male and female, of being able to be allies corresponding to one another in this unique way, this unique complementarity. We'll get it again in the Gospels or the cause of lifelong commitment. And we'll get to that later. That is an essential part of marriage because that is the covenant aspect, and that is God's relationship with us. In Ephesians, it is for building one another up in a relationship with the Lord.

We are still growing and have a lot of growth to do. How can we join together with the Lord and each other to enable that growth instead of ending up destroying each other? We will explore this further.

On page eight of the notes, there is a little chart illustrating the three-way relationship of the Lord, the man, and the woman in the marriage relationship. And we will keep emphasizing throughout this time that marriage is not merely a relationship of two. Yes, the two shall become one flesh. The essence of flesh is communicating; moreover, communicating good news. The verb "to flesh" means to proclaim good news. And so, where does that come from? We are incarnations of the image of God, designed to communicate the good news of who God is and the implications of that for life. The relationship is a relationship of three, not two. The two human beings become one expression of God in their relationship, in their unity. But the marriage is a relationship of three. How do they express something if they don't have that relationship? But not merely a relationship with God, their creator, but with the Lord, moreover, their redeemer. And so, just as the Godhead is a relationship of three, so is marriage. The spiritual head of the marriage is the Lord Jesus. He is the initiator. The man is the manager, and the woman is the nurturer, the life giver, the life encourager, the life sustainer. Each one of those has a correspondence to one of the members of the Godhead. And the beautiful thing about it is the management that the man is charged with is to serve and protect. It has nothing to do with selfish interest. This is what causes a lot of the fear of marriage, which is understandable because of the fall. But the fall doesn't happen until next week. So we're going to stick with the creation and the beauty of the creation tonight.

We want to look at the second page of this handout. I'm not in the handout I sent you; I'm in the course notes it came from. What we want to look at is page 11 of the notes, the second page of the handout we emailed you. You will see a table. Notice the same three aspects, same three elements: ABC, ABC, ABC. Down the left column header, the three levels of comparison here: the need for the man, purpose, the making of the man, execution of the purpose, the blessing to the man, the commissions for the couple. Classic three.

This is the key: the triadic fractal nature of everything God does. Don't let that bother you if it's an unfamiliar term. Triadic means three parts, and fractal means it is a pattern that is noticeable on every level. As you keep going deeper and deeper, you keep seeing the same pattern over and over. You look at one of the three elements, you look at it more closely, you'll see it's three sub-elements, same pattern, each one of those three, so forth and so on, and that's the way Scripture is organized, the way God communicates. I will go as far as to say I believe it's the way God thinks.

Notice the man is to serve the ground to nurture the cultivated plants. The woman. Every element corresponds. The nine essential elements of the description of the making of the first man and the nine essential elements of the description of making the first woman all correspond to each other. It's the same nine elements. ABC, one, two, three. One ABC, two ABC, three ABC. The man is to serve the ground resulting in the cultivated plants. The woman is to help the man and surround him as his ally to produce a cooperative relationship. Man, the making of man: dust of the ground is formed into a man. For the woman, the rib of the man is fashioned or built into a woman. The commission is to cultivate and keep the garden to result in unending life, with permanent dominion through unbroken obedience to God. That's the potential.

The commission regarding male and female is that the man is to leave parents and cleave to, bond to, stick to, glue to his wife, the woman, and they become one flesh. Together, they proclaim the nature of God in a way that goes beyond the proclamation of the nature of God that each one of them does individually. This is not instead of, it's in addition to.

The leaving of parents is graduation, not rebellion. It's the season of being nurtured and developed for adult life and responsibility and has run its course. There's a lot more that could be taught and learned, and there will be for the rest of life, but it's time for the man to be learning further through taking on the responsibilities of adulthood.

Notice the parallel in each of these areas, but also the distinction in each case. The distinction in the common element: serve, help, or service ally the ground, the man, the it. With regard to the man, it's particularly functional. With regard to the woman, it's personal and interpersonal. This is true of each one of these. Formed up to the ground into a man, functional. Fashion filled the rib of a man and the woman. You start with organic material. The elements of these distinctives are run out for you in the parenthetical explanation. This tells us so much about what male and female is all about. We have only mutual appreciation and mutual service and upbuilding. And that's the whole point.

It's really important that we maintain that in view as we recognize the effect of the fall and the ongoing dynamics that result from it. We are not just trying to get back to the garden. That's not good enough. This is "the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world." We are going way, way beyond it, but that's what we get into next week because of the drop before the potential great leap. One interesting aspect of names is that Adam is tied with the earth. We've for fun called him Dirt Man and actually... We've known various Adams who, from a young age, love being in the dirt. There's power inherent in names, even when the name isn't understood. And later on, Adam will name his wife Eve, which means mother of all the living. He's really recognizing that. Eve means life. He calls her life with the explanation because she's the mother of all the living.

We started with Genesis 1, noting the commonality. Both Adam and Eve show the image of God. Both relate to the Lord. Both are called to rule, to manage. Both of them. Cooperative. Both of them are called to be fruitful and multiply, to propagate the image of God on earth. Not just having babies, but encouraging people to come to the Lord and grow in Him. They share most of it in common. However, as in binocular vision, there's the specialty on each side, which gives the richness and the 3D aspect.

These distinctives show that they couldn't relate if they didn't share it in the spiritual and the ruling, the management and the relationship. They both do. Note how much we gain from the incarnation. We are able to relate to God so much more because Jesus came and lived on Earth, because the Son of God came and lived on Earth as a human being, as Jesus of Nazareth. We saw God in human form. Jesus' word to the disciples: "Just show us the Father and that's good enough." Realize you've been looking at the Father all the time as you've been looking at me. Not the Father as the distinct member of the Godhead, but you are seeing the Father in a way that you can't possibly see Him without me being here to show you. The way you can relate to.

Here what we're seeing is that though there is mostly commonality of calling, purpose, and ability, there is also the distinctives of specialty. A man's passion and what he just loves to do and is created for is to develop things and propagate things. You see that in tech. You see it in all sorts of professions where there's a joy in the doing, even though post-fall there's lots of thorns and thistles that makes it so frustrating. This keeps driving us back to the Lord. But he keeps track of the overall and the principle of things. He's been commissioned to make sure they follow what God has said. He's to keep track of that where we are going for the long run.

Her specialty, though she's also managing as well as relating, she can't help being attuned to what's happening personally with people. We've known incredibly talented women who were in biophysics and biology who can't ignore what's going on personally in the lab. We had one beautiful biochemist who said, though I'm working with very basic science that isn't going to benefit people directly, it's the building blocks on which medications are developed and all of that, but it's very basic. But I'm noting all the time what makes for good dynamics within a lab. What's good leadership, and what's not good leadership. And she now is leading a lab. And she knew that was what the Lord was leading her to. She couldn't ignore what was going on personally.

You can be a doctor, lawyer, or whatever, but it's the things you can't ignore that are part of the beauty of it. Post-fall, those become the important things and it becomes a point of contention and comparison. We'll get into that next week. But here, it's celebrating the commonality and the specialty, being able to really benefit. And that can be true in male-female friendships as well. For those who are single, this isn't just marriage. It's a wonderful thing in marriage.

I'm often looking to Steve for the long-term perspective and keeping us on track. I can always fill a lifetime, a hundred lifetimes with people we can help. But Steve helps to keep us on track with "yes, but what are we called to now?" Sometimes it's irritating, but it's a good, good gift. And he looks to me to help get a read on what's going on in the relationships. And then we join together with the Lord to be able to serve better with the perspective of those specialties. And sometimes the call to recognize those factors can be correspondingly irritating. "Oh, my gosh, we've really got to take that into account. Can't we just get it done? Of course we do." "But everything has a personal implication." "Boy, that was something I had to learn. There's no such thing as anything that's not personal." I cheered when Steve recognized that.

There's a beautiful passage in the New Testament in 1 Thessalonians where Paul is bringing up these two distinctives. As a single apostle, he represents the Lord by bringing both aspects. In 1 Thessalonians 2:7, he says, "But we prove to be gentle among you as a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children. Having thus a fond affection for you, we were well pleased to impart to you not only the gospel of God, but also our own lives because you had become very dear to us." He's expressing the personal aspect, the personal love of God, and personal care, understanding, nurturing, and encouraging forward, never giving up, but encouraging forward.

He goes on with the other side of it in verse 11, "You're witnesses and so is God, how devoutly and uprightly and blamelessly we behave toward you believers. We showed the way, didn't just tell it. Just as you know how we were exhorting and encouraging and imploring each one of you as a father would his own children." Notice which comes first. We tend to run out to do ministry, wanting to get right down to business and teach the word and tell people how to live their lives. No, no, no, no, no. That isn't where Jesus started either. He did teach, but he didn't focus on correcting people. He focused on meeting the needs that they already knew they had. Where were there already ears to hear? That expression of love made them say, "We'd like to learn from you. We'd like to become like you. You have a lot of wisdom we don't have. Teach us."

Paul exemplifies that the male and female distinctives are really powerful for explaining the essential elements of ministry. This is very special for singles to realize that you can really exemplify both. But then there's the special relationship of marriage where you can be a bit more specialized. And go farther in some ways, and we used to chuckle once we realized what was going on. Early on in the ministry, when we were counseling, it would drive Steve nuts because we'd be meeting with someone that we didn't know at all, and they would be pouring their story out to me and almost ignore Steve. We even tried things like my looking at Steve, hoping they would look at Steve. None of it worked because what they sensed in me was compassion and someone that they could trust and unload their story to. But then what Steve didn't realize was when it came time for answers, they turned to Steve and practically ignored me. I didn't notice that because I was so busy responding to the opportunity to teach insights from the words that could bless these people. They wanted to make sure that what they based their life on was truth, that wouldn't be tempered by feelings. They recognized that I, as a man, would not be as vulnerable to trying to make them feel good, or attempting to make it overly comfortable.

Now, both of us have balanced out. We have both learned. I have learned to be much more compassionate and understanding, recognizing the need to go there first in order to gain a hearing. And they're more confident that Erica will be a straight shooter. She's known for that. And when she teaches, like at a women's retreat, she teaches the word. There's a man who is now home with the Lord who managed the PA system and the recordings in the main auditorium at Mount Hermon. On occasions when Erica would teach there, John would tell her, "I love it so much when you teach here because you are a woman who teaches the word."

I've learned a lot, which meant that she teaches very much as a woman. She doesn't teach as a man. Nobody can confuse that. It's very much as a woman. But she teaches the word, and she delivers in a way that is really effective with women because she is a woman who really understands from a woman's perspective. We have learned from each other not to be so polarized in our maleness and femaleness in ministry. What we have learned in ministering together side by side from each other, from the Lord through each other, has made most of us much better in ministry in any and every context.

We should finish because we went significantly longer than we will normally. Please pray because the spiritual warfare is huge, especially with this topic. Next week we will get into Genesis 3. We've been saying the effect of the fall on men and women, on male and female, but not just the bad news. As we understand how it works and what results in making more extreme the male and female tendencies and the judgmentalism and all of that that goes with it. The wonderful opportunities that come out of that will work out. We'll be looking at strategies to stay, recognize it, and not be had by it. It's very helpful information. Become proclaimers of the good news of the Lord's redeeming work from the tragic consequences of the fall with respect to gender, individuals, and in relationships of all sorts. This week was the good news. The encouragement is to really celebrate who the Lord has created you to be and the gifting and to show forth His image in all relationships, whatever your status is, whatever point in life you are, as the greatest opportunity every day. Give joy to the Lord and to bring His presence to others. That's the best preparation for marriage if that's ahead for you, and the best place to get to serve the Lord wherever you are. Know His tremendous love as we're the bride of Christ. He has committed Himself with us and invites us into partnership with Him, which is the highest calling there is.

> Let's pray. Oh, Lord, thank you for the wonder, your love for us, and that you're creating us to share in your life by the Holy Spirit and to show you forth in your glorious character, your glorious presence to bring you to this broken world and to relationship. Thank you that though we're not in a position and you don't intend us to be to control others, though we keep trying, that there is so much opportunity every day to grow in your love, in your character, and giving you joy as we show you forth, as we manage our thinking and words and actions and our bodies and living space and all our work, all that we do, that all of it's a setting, yet to partner with you, show you forth. And thankThank you that that opens so many doors to the future, prepares us for your good, good plans, including in male and female. We're thankful that you give us a high purpose, each one of us, and have handcrafted us for that, gifted us for it. May we grow in exercising that by the power and life of your spirit. In your name, amen.
