Oh Lord, thank you that you are with us. You are Emmanuel, God with us always in all circumstances. We are so thankful that we are never alone, never without your strong encouragement and help and compassion and your life within by your Holy Spirit to grow into more and more each day. Lord, thank you for your Good Shepherd's leading and care in our lives, including in times where we can't see the way, but we know that you are the way and you have the way. Lord, thank you for your beautiful creation that we looked at last week before the fall in beauty and abundance and your special creation of us as male and female. And Lord, thank you too for the grace hard luck that we will get this week of the effect of the fall including on us as male and female. Lord, may we learn not just the bad news but learn wisdom from staying on top of it with you the Redeemer. May we listen for the strategic ways that as we understand what's happened, we can stay above it and not just continue it by the power and life of your Spirit and be part of your redemptive work in a broken world.

Thank you for each one here. Open our ears to hear you and to hear, especially what's for each of us tonight, as well as equipping to come alongside others with wisdom and compassion. Thank you, Lord, in your name. Amen.

Welcome. Quick recap, because it's been a full week. As you know, last week, we got the only glimpse before the fall from the one who was there, from our amazing Creator, God, Genesis 1 and 2. In Genesis 1, the word for God is Elohim. As we looked at, it's plural. There's the hint of the Trinity in it that even rabbis saw until Jesus came on earth and that they shut it down. They're wanting to talk about that possibility. But thank you, Lord, that there are three, Father, Son, and Spirit, and have been there from the beginning. Amen.

The word used in Genesis 1 is Elohim, the God of power and creativity and of might. What we saw there was His creating us first a world of abundance and beauty meant to be a sanctuary of His presence, which it will be with the new heavens and the new earth where heaven and earth intersect and the Lord Himself is there dwelling amongst us face to face. We saw His creating and then creating the apex of His creation, us, male and female, the only human distinction before the fall, so foundational to be able to display our triune God, essentially the same, but with specialties, which we end up seeing in chapter two, that enables love, enables giving and taking, because we're not all the same, and appreciation and a much richer display of our amazing God.

We saw that both men and women are commissioned to rule, to manage, and to be fruitful and multiply, to relate in a way that displays God Himself. That's a signpost of His presence. And that we get to do these in a way that shows forth the living God and His beautiful character. Then in chapter two last week, we saw the up close and personal of backing up to look deeply and in much more detail at the creation of male and female. The word for God is Yahweh, which is His covenant name, His personal name. He's the one that Moses met at the burning bush, "I am." "I am whatever you need. I am." And "I am always what you need." We saw that each one of them, the man and the woman, had their own relationship with God. Each of them woke up to Him. That's essential for a healthy male-female relationship, that each of us have our own relationship with Jesus. We're growing in Him and then can, because of that, have His life within to bring to one another. It's a three-way alliance as the two of us and the Lord. We also saw, though they were essentially the same, chapter two brings out the specialties that each of them were created for in purpose and material and focus, the specialties that make a much richer alliance.

We saw with the man, he had his perfect relationship with God, perfect work with no gophers, no bugs in the computer system, just getting with a passion to develop and work with the creation and move it out to manage it in a way that enables life, not management that controls and kills life, but management that enables life to flourish. We saw that he was the one that the Lord gives the commands to before the woman is ever on the scene. "From every tree, from this abundance of beauty and variety, you may eat, but not from this one tree, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. For in the day you eat of it, dying you shall die," a Hebrew way of underlining that this is very bad news. And then we see the creating of the woman, but first with the purpose statement that she's to be an ally, not just a tag along or a servant, but an ally equal in worth. That word ally is used more often of the Lord Himself in the Old Testament as He comes alongside of us, so it's a high calling. Nothing diminutive about it takes everything that I've got to be a wise and godly ally to Steve, not an adversary, as we'll see tonight.

But He also takes the man through the process of discovering his need for that unique ally, searching through the animal kingdom, getting to know them and their characteristics, naming them accordingly because Hebrew names are not just mnemonics, but it's describing the essence of that being and discovering that there is not one corresponding to him. We talked about how men need to go through that in our age, not just with animals, but with buddies, men and women, companionship. But it's important that they come to the point of really knowing their need to value and welcome an ally who is equal in worth to join with them in their calling from the Lord.

We serve the Lord together as allies in the Grand Three-Way Alliance with the Lord Himself. We saw so much last week and it was very good, as the Lord Himself said, and we left them naked and not ashamed, the description of total intimacy, no need to hold anything back out of fear of judgment on the closest of unity, which Jesus raised for us now, post-fall, that we would be one as He and the Father are one in His high priestly prayer in John 17.

There's something that I don't think we mentioned at the end of Genesis 2 that I want to be sure to include: "For this cause, a man shall leave his father and mother, and the two shall become one flesh." We don't get the implications of the term flesh there because there's always a problem in translation. Languages do not correspond to each other one-to-one. Vocabulary is not just familiar. I think all of you have done some work in foreign languages, and you pick up language X, language Y dictionary, and every one of the entries has a huge amount of possibilities in the other language.

Flesh is one of those that doesn't correspond directly between Hebrew and English. Flesh does mean what we generally use it to mean, living tissue, or even butchered meat, but there is a much broader meaning. It's a phenomenon in almost all languages, perhaps all, that the most fundamental terms are verbs. Then nouns are derived from verbs and so on for the various parts of speech. But the verb is seen as being really the root meaning. The use of flesh as a verb, to flesh, which we don't say in English, is very significant because it has the meaning to proclaim news, and more specifically, good news.

When we recognize that, the two shall become one flesh. We are created as incarnations of God's image. We are living representations of God in a form that can be comprehended in an earthly setting. The animals can get it. Other people can get it. In fact, that's in that threefold statement: "God created man in his own image. In the image of God, he created him. Male and female, he created them." So man, capital M, God's proper name, and it's God's name for the human race, applies to both male and female human beings. It is not gender exclusive. It is not human gender connected at all. It's all of us.

With the three ways our being living images of God, particularly being created in God's image has to do with our relationship with God, our relationship to all observers, animals, other people. Then thirdly, our relationship to each other. With a married couple, the alliance of the two of them, which really is an alliance of three, just like the Godhead, because marriage is intended to be a relationship of the Lord God, a man, and a woman in covenant relationship. The relationship between them, the visible observation of a married couple, should communicate a great deal about God, about the true God. It expresses God's relational nature and especially God's love in a very powerful graphic way. We see it only after the fall, so we see it only partially. With the first couple, it was fully there. It wasn't very developed yet, I'm sure. We see this develop over the years with a married couple where their marriage is centered in and under the lordship of Jesus. The term flesh gives us a clue that a married couple should express God uniquely in a way that proclaims a very particular good news available to all people. The witness to God in a godly marriage is a very powerful thing. And as Erica noted, of all the distinctives or distinctions between any two individual human beings, there is only one that is so fundamental as to be part of being created in God's image. And that's gender. It is given to us as a wondrous opportunity to express God.

What we're going into tonight introduces the extreme challenges of doing that well in this world because we don't live in the perfect world that the first couple lived in. We don't know for how long. Just give a very quick example of what Steve was talking about, about how even post-fall, a couple where it's a strong three-way alliance of the Lord and the two of them, and each of them growing and displaying, bringing the Lord's beautiful character to each other and then together to others, that it telegraphs the presence of the living God, especially post-fall because people don't expect it.

One quick example from our lives, many of you know, I just about died giving birth to our third almost 30 years ago. Bled massively and shouldn't have a mind, shouldn't be here at all. But the Lord wasn't done with me. Toward the end of that week, one of the nurses was in my room and they all called me the bleeding lady. She said, we all figured (meaning all the nurses) that you and Steve are on your second marriage. I said, oh, really? What makes you think that? She said, because of how tenderly Steve cares for you. And I said, well, actually, at that point, we're well over 20 years and we have had plenty of growth issues, but we've done it on our knees with the Bible open. And Jesus has radically changed both of us and we needed it. She said, I knew it. Now I know why anytime I have free time, I want to do my charting in your room because there's a peace and a joy here that I don't experience anywhere else.

It turned out she and her husband were seekers and had tried out various churches and felt comfortable or welcome. And so I got to tell her about a church near where they lived. She said, oh, you're the second person who has told me about that church. We will need to go. It was the care, the love, the care for one another that telegraphed the Lord's presence, and it didn't take perfect to do that. That's what the Lord loves to do post-fall. What we look at tonight is what went wrong. If we took chapters one, two, and three out of the Bible, life would not make sense as we see it. Chapter three tells us what went desperately wrong and the deep impact that it has had on relationships between men and women, human relationships in general, and also our management or poor management of animals, the earth, et cetera. The reason to go into this is not to bury ourselves in bad news, but to understand the context we live in so that we can be redemptive.

With each section that we look at tonight, we will note how understanding this can be very redemptive in staying on top of it with the Lord instead of being had by it and continuing the evil of the fall in our own lives and our impact on others. Tonight should be very redemptive, not just all bad news.

**Genesis 3**

We start with the temptation. As we look at it, be listening for understanding the way that Satan tempts all of us because he has not had to change his game plan because it works. As we understand it, we can recognize it and stay above it. Paul in 2 Corinthians actually talked about that in 2 Corinthians 2:11, "In order that no advantage be taken of us by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his schemes." There's a description here and we'll be noting elements of it so that you can note it when it's coming at you and are able to stay above it with the Lord instead of be had and help others as well.

Then we'll be looking at the Lord's redemptive work after we as the human race did go for it. We pick up in Genesis 3:1, "The serpent was more crafty than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made." There's a connection between Genesis 2:24-25. The previous verse was, "And they were naked and unashamed." Immediately we have a serpent who was more crafty. There's a connection there. There's a pun in the Hebrew. Puns in the Bible, which is full of puns, but usually they're not humorous puns, they're instructive puns. Naked (arom), crafty (arum), same consonants, same basic spelling but one of the vowels different, and it illustrates the fact that the tempter did not come in being radically different. He came in a way that would seem very familiar. They were familiar with animals. He takes an animal form. He is not essentially an animal. He's a spirit, but is able, of course, with the Lord's permission, to take on a physical form for this purpose, which actually does accomplish the Lord's purposes. He's more crafty than any beast in the field, which the Lord God had made. He comes as one of the animals, but he's distinct in actually a very dangerous way. And he said to the woman, "Indeed, has God said, you should not eat from any tree of the garden?" And the woman said to the serpent, "From the trees of the garden we may eat. But from the fruit of the tree, which is in the middle of the garden, God has said you should not eat from it or touch it, or you'll die."

This animal doesn't seem to be very surprised that the animal is speaking, but that may have been a totally new thing, but no reason to suspect that this wasn't just some new phenomenon that they hadn't come across yet. Seemingly asking merely for information, as though they wanted a clarification. "Do I understand this right?"

The Hebrew insight, the word for "any" and "every" is the same term. So, you should not eat from any tree in the garden. Is there any tree you shouldn't eat from? Or it may also be, as God said, you should not eat from every tree in the garden. Every tree that was pleasing to the sight, good for food, except for one. Infinity minus one. Still infinity. And of course, there weren't an infinite number, but still, for all practical purposes, that same principle.

If you've got everything but one, you've got virtually everything, and you can focus on that. Is there really an exception to this wonderful abundance that you're enjoying? She just gives a matter of fact response. She knows that there is a limitation and she mentions it. She doesn't describe it exactly the way God described it to her husband. She doesn't describe it as the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. But she knows which tree it is. The tree that's in the middle of the garden.

There's a little male-female tweet to this thing. She is not answering in functional identification, but in relational identification. It's that tree that's in the middle of the garden. She knows what tree it is, and she's referring to it in a perfectly normal way, but it doesn't contain all the information. She knows which tree, and she knows which one not to eat from.

It's interesting, though she does say something that does depart significantly from what the Lord told the man. How does she know it? The Lord gave the information to him for both of them, for all people. But this, or touch it, that's definitely a departure from what God actually said. Where does that come from? We don't know for sure, and the text does not tell us.

Bible texts contain everything we need to know about what it's talking about, but they also contain some little hints at other things and some little puzzles, which helps us really to want to dig in deeper in Scripture. The logical question is, where did this come from or touch it? Speculation, of course, but it seems to us that most likely, though God didn't say don't touch it, her husband did. The scenario may well have gone that the man was showing her the abundance, and this is all just wonderful. However, there's one exception, and you need to know about it. And I'm sure he told her that the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, but that didn't really mean anything to her. What she connected with because they didn't know the difference between good and evil because everything they encountered was good. And so that may not have seemed significant to her. The important thing was don't eat from this tree.

Naturally, she would wonder, "why? What is it about this tree?" And she almost certainly would have started to move in to try to examine it closely to answer that question. And that's the point at which it makes complete sense that he would say, "don't even touch it!" If you don't touch it, you're not going to eat the fruit, and we're not going to die. They had no experience with death yet. But it's something that was important enough that God warned against it. They knew it was not somewhere they should go, that they wanted to go.

It's how law works, that God has said no to something. So we're going to put some extra hedges around it so we don't get near it. And those become absolutes as well, what the Jews became. That's endemic to rabbinical teaching. They're trying to be really diligent and keep people busy, guard people against doing things that were not okay with God. They started considering, "what could that possibly include?" If we exclude more than necessary, we've excluded what is essential to exclude. But if we don't exclude something that is part of what this is worrying about, then there will be bad consequences. So don't work on the Sabbath. Well, it's to be a day of rest. The point is not that they went beyond the resting to, "don't do any work". What's work? Well, it's really don't do any laborious work. It doesn't mean, but they sort of say, "well, you pick up a spoon to stir your coffee. You're doing work by lifting it up". I didn't think they had physics down to that sophisticated level yet. But that technically is work. So that's where we got this, build a hedge around it. Make sure you don't get hurt.

Now, the tempter says to the woman, "You surely will not die." Direct contradiction of God's warning. "For God knows." Now we've escalated from direct contradiction to, why would God say something that's not true? "He knows in the day you eat from it, your eyes will be open. You will be like God or God's knowing good and evil." Oh, so now we move to why would God say something that was not true? So inference is don't trust God. You'll lose out on something absolutely spectacularly wonderful if you trust God. And very suddenly, "trust me instead".

When the woman saw that the tree was good for food... Is that true? Well, Genesis 2 tells us. God planted every tree that is pleasing to the sight and good for food. "Good for food" is what we're told verbatim. "And that it was a delight to the eyes." Go back to Genesis 2. It says "Pleasing to the sight" (Genesis 2:9) Pleasing to the sight and delight to the eyes... it's similar but not the same. And "desirable to make one wise". This is pragmatically wise, like successful. "This is you do this to succeed. God doesn't want you to succeed in becoming like Him", which is a flat-out contradiction because God created us to be like Him.

When she saw the tree was good for food, delight to the eyes, this term, pleasing to the sight, is aesthetically pleasing. A little more specific translation is that it was dazzling to the eyes. Mesmerizing. Way beyond merely being pleasant to see. One was spot on. The second one was sort of the same. The third one, there's no antecedent. The evil one uses this ploy all the time in slipping counterfeits our way. Start with something that is unquestionably true, then take something that has a familiar ring to it. It may not be exactly the same as what we already know for a fact. Having gained confidence, slip something in that we have no way to evaluate except, well, this guy seems to have been right. Two out of three is not bad. It wasn't really two out of three. It was kind of one and a half out of three.

The issue with counterfeits is that they are not the real thing. A counterfeiter wants to gain an unfair advantage by passing something off as being valuable that, in fact, is not. It's not the genuine thing. They try to make it as much like the real thing as possible and limit the differences from the real thing to things that hopefully are small enough to seem insignificant and to be overlooked. People who are to handle money and need to spot counterfeit bills are never shown a counterfeit. Never. They are shown the real thing in extreme detail and over and over so they really come to know the real thing so thoroughly that when a counterfeit comes into their hands, they spot the departure from the real thing. They spot the error very quickly.

That is helpful to us. The way not to be taken in by the arch deceiver, the evil one in this world, is to get to know the real thing very deeply. The real thing is God's word, God's written word. The better we get to know God's written word, the better we are able to discern what is truly an opportunity for life and what's a trap, leading to some form of death.

When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, a delight to the eyes, and desirable to make one wise, she took from its fruit and ate. "See, good, take" is the classic sequence in walking by sight that is a transgressing what God says because something else looks better. And we find this pattern throughout Scripture, many times. "See, good, take", including David with Bathsheba. There are numerous instances.

Now, she took from its fruit and ate, and she gave to her husband with her. Now, it's very clear the interaction that's recorded here up to this point is between the serpent, the evil one appearing in the form of a serpent, and the woman. We can infer that Adam was not present during that conversation. But we know he was with her when she ate. And he didn't do anything. It was his job to see that they didn't. The Lord charged him with seeing to it that they did not eat the fruit from that tree. To cultivate and keep, to guard from their own choice. It was to serve the garden and guard the garden from departure from God's instructions. But "she gave to her husband with her, and he ate."

There may have been a deception there in that Adam didn't see any harm come to her in eating from the fruit. However, he knew that God said not to eat it. As we find in 1 Timothy 2:14, "Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived fell into transgression." Her transgression, her stepping over the line, was not an act of willful disobedience. His was. Even if he was deceived into thinking it wouldn't have the consequence that God said, he still knew that he was violating God's instruction and warning. 1 Timothy 2:14 says that she was deceived and he was not. He willfully disobeyed. It wasn't that she didn't cross the line. She did, and with big consequences. But she thought she was choosing something good. When she did it, she was deceived.

And part of that may have been her specialty: promoting life, quality of life, and this seemed like an opportunity for that.

And that's why the tempter went to her, not to him, because he wanted to appeal to the one that he could draw away from her knowledge of what God had said and who had it second hand. "She gave to her husband with her, and he ate. Then the eyes of both of them were opened".

It's interesting. Her eyes were not open from eating because she did not disobey willfully. She didn't see things differently as a result of what she did. But when he ate, and the Lord's commandment to the man was, "You shall not eat from it." Now it's not that it didn't apply to her. It did. But the Lord put the responsibility on him. And it's when he ate that then the eyes of both of them were opened. They were open before, of course, to take in physical sight. But now the eyes are becoming agents of other information other than about the physical world. The eyes of both of them were open. They knew they were naked. They'd been naked and unashamed.

Shame in this idiom is not a matter of personal embarrassment, which is the way it is with typically Western culture people. It's not a matter of damaging the name or reputation of the family or social group. It's being defeated. It's military, it's warfare. They were naked in their shame. They had not been conquered. They had not been defeated. They were free to do whatever. So they knew they were naked. They sewed fig leaves together, made themselves loin coverings. Very interesting.

Now, of course, they used a very temporary medium and they needed to have these aprons of fig leaves. They'd be remaking them at least every couple of days. But the important thing is, why did they make a loin covering? Why didn't they run down to Safeway, get some grocery bags, and put bags over their heads? And not just because there was no Safeway at that point. Why didn't they cover their heads? Why didn't they cover their eyes? Why the genital region? Deep, deep revelation of the significance of this. They're now ashamed, but it's not just ashamed of physical nakedness. They don't want to be exposed, and specifically, they know what the function and effect of the genitals is.

In chapter four, we'll get the term, you know, Adam knew his wife Eve as the biblical euphemism for that had sexual relations with her. There's a deep hint at what sex is all about. It's to enter into a very deep knowledge of one another in a way that it cannot be acquired any other way. Every married couple knows that in the times that they are celebrating their marriage physically, sexually, at the point of climax, there is an extreme openness and ability to see into each other. We talk about the eyes being the window on the soul because it's generally recognized that a lot can be seen in someone's eyes, which is really interesting because we don't see anything physical in their eyes, but it's an experience of being able to see very deeply into each other, and that is wonderful for two who are becoming one in all ways. It's not something wonderful with a number of people. But this is specifically God's intent for marriage. They knew and remembered their marriage relationship was perfect, not in the sense of mature. We don't know how long they lived before the tempter showed up and the fall came. But they suddenly knew they didn't want to be seen. They didn't want to be exposed because suddenly there's something they don't want others to know. This is new. They heard the sound of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day. God will confirm later toward the end of this chapter that the man, behold, in verse 22, the man has become like one of us. Both of the things that the tempter promised are actually true. This shows the deception because God knows the day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened. That's confirmed later on. Their eyes were opened. "You'll be like God, knowing good and evil." That's also confirmed later on.

Good is that which enables and engenders life, and evil is that which destroys life. They're deciding now by sight, not by listening to the Lord for what leads to long-term forms of death, what leads to long-term forms of life. They're deciding by sight. That's how all of us operate naturally, that we have the sense that I can size things up myself. Most all of us are trained in fine point analysis. There's the sense that "I can look, I can observe, I can analyze, and I can come up with what's really going on or what I should do". It's human arrogance because we never see all of the parameters and we can't see where things will go for the long run. Only the Lord, who's the Creator and outside of time, can see that.

Let's just look for a moment at the method that the adversary used. As we noted at the beginning, he has not had to change his game plan because it still works. There are numbers of elements that he uses as a standard approach. As Paul said in 2 Corinthians 2:11, "that no advantage be taken of us by Satan, for we're not ignorant of his schemes."

What have we seen here? First of all, he's coming in acting like someone under them who's just a friend. He's one of the animals under them. There are times when people who are even good friends, they may even be mature believers, but not in this case. We can all be mature in some areas and not in others. A counselor, a pastor, someone in your family, people even with the best of intent can offer and urge things that if we are wise, we step back to say, "Lord, what do you say about this in Your word? Is there anything You say?"

An example from my time as an undergrad at Stanford. I had various friends, some believers, who were telling me, "you should be sleeping around. You are really missing out. You're being silly by holding to waiting for marriage... go for it. Fortunately, even as a young believer, I knew to step back to what the Lord said and knew that that would lead to long-term good life that I would have and be able to impart to others. And so I didn't. And those friends came to me later in tears and heartbreak because the relationship didn't last.

And we always have to say, that even if you didn't follow the Lord's plan, redemption is available. And we've seen many who've been healed, as "God will always cause everything to work together for good to those who love Him." However, there are real consequences. There are real consequences, but God will use it redemptively. And so the fact that God will bring good out of it is not a reason to be cavalier about entering into that which God warns against.

So just to recap here, Satan's coming in, acting like the friend, and really insinuating, "Aren't you missing out? Is God really for your good? Why would He withhold something from you?" He distracts from the fact that the Lord has made basically infinity minus one available to them from "every tree in the garden you may eat except this one. But he focuses her and then them in on the one exception and is insinuating God is holding out because He doesn't want you to be like Him. Actually, they're created in His image. But she's following his line of argument. And instead of stepping back to "what has the Lord said" and "is he trustworthy" and "how much has he provided?" Instead, she's following the line of argument and going in closer and closer. And what is he doing? He's citing, "well, I can figure this out for myself". And that's exactly what the Lord is warning against.

Lack of thanksgiving is a huge issue here. Milton in Paradise Lost said that that was one of the causes of the fall. Instead of being thankful for all that the Lord had provided, they became focused on the one thing He said no to. And that makes us very vulnerable. Instead of thanking the Lord for all that he has given, we get focused on the few things He has said no to. And we'll come back to this later, but why the minus one? Why the one exception? Apart from it, cooperating with the Lord would be automatic. It would be mechanical. There had to be some element of being in harmony with the Lord by free will choice not to depart from Him.

Now, after the fall, it then is the free will choice to accept the offer of salvation and enter into intimacy with the Lord, having known what it's like not to trust Him, and thereby appreciating what it is to trust Him. Not just that, but being in alliance with Him by free will choice, which is the way the alliance of the Trinity functions.

"They heard the sound of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day." If they heard that and they knew what it was, it was a familiar sound. Interesting implications of that. They're used to having the Lord show up in some sort of presumably human manifestation. They're spending time together at the end of the day. "How's the day been? Show me what you've done".

I remember when my parents were remodeling the attic in our house to put in two bedrooms because we now were four boys, and it was really exciting. The workmen would be there, but then we didn't go upstairs up the old unfinished stairs to the attic until after the workmen had left and Dad had come home from work. It was a fun family thing each day to go up and see what the workmen had done, see this developing. And I can imagine at this time, the cool of the day, as the winds start to come up, the breezes start to come up, that the Lord would come. There's an interesting implication of that. They're used to connecting with Him on a regular basis.

With this proposition that's been put forth, why not wait? Why not wait and ask the Lord? They could have said to Satan or to themselves, very interesting proposition. Let's ask the Lord about it. We've heard what you have to say. Now let's hear what the Lord has to say. They didn't do that. Important for us to do.

They hid themselves from the presence of the Lord among the trees of the garden. The Lord God called to the man and said to him angrily, "Where are you?" Those are the words, but obviously, that was not the tone. Rather it was in grief: "where are you?" It's not that He doesn't know. A little child is up to something. The parent may actually not know where the child is. Where are you? I'm hiding behind the sofa. It may not even stop there. I'm hiding behind the sofa because I don't want you to see what I'm doing. Oh, really? What are you doing?

The time I did that when I was little, I was behind the easy chair, cutting my bangs with buttonhole scissors. I knew this was not OK, but I was hiding. The man said, "I heard the sound of you in the garden and I was afraid". Fear enters because of guilt. I was afraid because I was naked. "Who told you you were naked?" They were naked, but they didn't attach any significance to it. That's the way they always were. There was no significance to it. And suddenly, that becomes a big deal. Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree of which I commanded you not to eat? It's not what somebody said to you. It's your action that has revealed this to you, that you want to hide, that you feel ashamed.

The man said, the woman you gave me. Maybe the game is shame and blame, pass it on. That's what we do when we are ashamed, when we have done things we know we shouldn't, and we're squirming. It's very easy. We'll try to shift the blame any way we can. The parent comes in, the little kids are squabbling. Who started this? She did. She hit me back. We've heard that. Oh, really? It started when she hit you back. Erica came in with her younger siblings at one point. One of them complained to the parent about having been hit by the other one. But it's interesting. They were in the bathtub together. The red hand mark was on the back of the other child, not on the back of the child who cried, he just hit me. We learn the game very readily and we don't really have to be taught.

Does the man say he ate? No. The woman whom you gave to me to be with me, she gave to me from the tree and I ate. Yeah, I did eat, but it's because she gave it to me. The Lord God said to the woman, what's this you've done? The woman said, the serpent deceived me and I ate. The Lord God said to the serpent, "Because you've done this, cursed are you more than all cattle, more than every beast of the field. On your belly you will go, and dust you will eat all the days of your life." And He goes on from there.

Notice, "where are you? Who told you? What have you done?" Those are very significant questions, and God asks those questions to us many times, and typically in that sequence. Where are you? Take a look. Where do you find yourself? Not where are you spatially, but where are you, and particularly where are you relative to Me and My word? And where are you in terms of what has developed in consequence of your blowing off My word? These are really three redemptive questions that He asks. Here, as Steve said, the tone was one of grief. He, like Jesus weeping over Jerusalem, had pled with Jerusalem, but they would not have it. He longed to gather them under His wings as a chicken does her young to save them from judgment, but they wouldn't have it. It's with grief that He asks questions like this. He knew the only solution. He knew the horrible evil, the brokenness, the hurt, the brokenheartedness that would come out of this in the human race, all the divisions that we live with today. He knew where this would go. He knew that the only solution was His own death.

And by the way, Satan uses the word for God as authority. If the authority said no to you, the authority has the functional God said to you, doesn't use the relational, the name, God's relational name. He doesn't ever refer to God as being personal. But here it's as translated in most English translations, the Lord God, Yahweh, the covenant God that we come to know as Jesus. He is there reaching into them redemptively, even knowing what it will cost Him, the highest cost possible to bring saving solution to this. They have virtually no concept of where this is leading, but He knows.

So this is how our God approaches us when we've blown it and we feel so vulnerable and we dread talking with Him, let alone others. When we feel shame, when we know we've done wrong, our immediate desire is to hide every way possible and shift the blame. The blaming goes on in relationships all the time, in business as well as in marriages and families. His three redemptive questions are: Where are you? Is this really resulting in the life you thought it would? Where are you with regard? Are you where you expected to be as a result of this course of action? Who told you? Who were you listening to? Me, the Lord, or somebody else? And, "What have you done? What did you actually do?" Not what you rationalized, but what did you actually do? And it's redemptive. It's not to nail us, call us out in a mean way. This is to help us redemptively. There are times where heHe will say that in each of our lives. It's very good for us to listen so that we can learn, so we can grow, so we can heal, because that's His intent.

Notice He just follows the man, points, directs things to the woman. The Lord then turns His attention to the woman. The woman points to the serpent, the tempter. The Lord turns His attention to the serpent. And so, because you have done this, so now we're down to the initiator of this whole thing. "Because you have done this, cursed are you more than all cattle, more than every beast of the field. On your belly, dust you shall eat all the days of your life." What's the point of dust? God formed a man's body from dust to the ground. He's going to be snarfing away at human beings continuously. But "I will put enmity between you and the woman, between your seed and her seed. He shall literally crush you on the head, and you shall crush him on the heel." Having your head crushed is fatal. Having your heel crushed, as in the jaws of an animal, is not fatal. It's painful. I know because I had a bad heel bruise when I was competing as a distance runner, and it took months to heal and it was very painful. But I recovered.

Her seed, singular, not a whole lot of seeds. The seed of the woman will show up multiple times in Scripture in the New Testament. We are the seed of the woman. We are the seed of Abraham. We're the seed of the woman. But the seed, capital S, there's only one. He will crush you in the head. Jesus will inflict the fatal wound on the evil one, and that's the substitutionary atonement, which brings about forgiveness, the reversal of the final consequence of the tempter's work. But of course, benefiting from it is a choice that every individual has to make.

What the evil one did to the Lord in getting to the cross was not permanent because the Father raised Him from the dead, and there's no raising the serpent from the dead.

Theologians see that as the first statement. Genesis 3:15. This promise of the seed of the woman who will set things right and the promise of the fatal punishment on the tempter is the great promise, and it's through the seed of the woman. Theologians call this the Proto-Evangelium, the first declaration of the good news.

Notice the message to the man. She may have been instrumental in what you were responsible for and you are blamed for. But through her will come the relief from this. So treasure her. The Lord is putting them back together. He is so compassionate and kind. You can see the work of the adversary with this one deft temptation separating them from the Lord, separating them from each other. The woman you gave me. But now the Lord, working redemptively already, puts them back together because the hope or the healing will come through the woman and through their union.

Then He comes back to the woman and says, "I will greatly multiply your pain in childbirth, literally your pain and your conception. In pain you shall bring forth children. Your desire shall be of your husband and he will rule over you." In pain you bring forth children. Why? They are going to blow you off, you and your husband, their mother and father, just as you blew Me off. A pastor friend who told about one time he had to discipline his adolescent son. He told his son, "This is more painful for me than for you because God punishes me." The son said to him, "How does God punish you?" The pastor didn't have an answer at that moment. But I think the answer is by seeing our children insist on repeating our mistakes. And it's so painful because we would like to teach them not to make those mistakes, but seeing them make them anyway and having to learn the hard way.

"Yet your desire shall be for her husband, and he will rule over you." The word "desire" here does not refer to a woman's sexual desire for intimacy with her husband. The desire and rule pair shows up again on the next page in Genesis 4. The warning to Cain, "if you do good", not if you do well. Almost all English translations translate it as "if you do well". They're trying to make it good English grammar, but that's not the point. It's not the quality of what you do. If you do that which is good, it's not an adjective or an adverb. It's not an adverb if you do well. It's a noun. "If you do good..." if you do that which is good, you'll get over your depression and estrangement from me. But if you don't, "sin is crouching at the door like a predatory animal ready to pounce. But you must master it." The same pair of words. "And its desire is for you, but you must master it." That's Genesis 4:7.

This desire is to take over, and he will rule over you. This is not the beginning of male leadership in marriage and in the home. This is not the term that's used for ruling over the animals. It's the term that is used for the regulation of time by the celestial luminaries in the fourth day in Genesis 1. You will try to take over from him by fear. You will be tempted to try to dominate him out of fear of what will happen if you trust him. He will try to control you rigidly out of fear of what will happen if you take over. This is describing the effects of the fall, the effects of the fall, which is then the challenge to overcome.

And the key, stated in just two words in Ephesians 5, is that the calling of the wife is to respect her husband. This doesn't mean as you know a great man in the community or in business or whatever his work is and so forth. It's to respect him as head. The context says very clearly it's to respect him as head, that is, his leader. A head is not a detached master. Think about the relationship between the head and body. His calling is to love her. It's not his calling to make her obey. It's not her calling to make him love her. However, how could she make him love her? By respecting him as a man and trusting what God has. By joining with him as an ally. Joining with him. A man can't help but love a wife who respects him. A wife can't help but love and respect a husband who loves her. This is the challenge that the Lord works out with us in marriage.

Now he comes back to the man and he said, "because you have listened to the voice of your wife..." please don't ever stop at that point! He didn't fault the man for listening to his wife. He's supposed to listen to her. In fact, with Abraham at one point, He tells Abraham, listen to the voice of your wife. It's a matter of what is she saying? Don't listen to the voice of your wife when she is suggesting something that would mean disobeying Me, the Lord. What is written. If a wife gets an idea and you realize this is contrary to Scripture, you don't take the suggestion. You help her to understand why it may seem good, but it really isn't good.

"Because you've listened to the voice of your wife and eaten from the tree which I commanded you, saying you shall not eat from it. Cursed is the ground because of it, and in toil you will eat of it all the days of your life." He's going to find his work frustrating. Who did the Lord blame? The tempter and the man. He did not blame the woman. It's easy to read this text superficially and say the woman caused the fall. She did not. The man caused the fall. Erica pointed to 1 Timothy 2, highlighting that she was deceived and did not rebel against God. He did.  The point of looking at this, which is helpful for understanding male and female now, and the challenges that we have, but also how to be redemptive with it. The Lord is describing here is the impact of the fall on each of them. In Genesis 2, the specialty of the woman is the whole personal relationship area. And that's confirmed again because the Lord says the biggest impact of the fall on her, (not as a punishment, but as the built-in consequence) is that she will experience a lot of pain as she is raising children and that there will be war between husband and wife because of fear. And that gets played out all the time.

And knowing that it affects both husband and wife, the Lord is saying to the woman is, this is what will affect you the most deeply of all the issues that come out of the fall. And to the man, he's saying, what will affect you the most deeply? Of course, the relational things matter. But the thing that goes to the core is the sense of frustration and futility in your work. You will pour everything you've got into it and it will turn up thorns and thistles and end up being futile. In the garden, chapter two, the result of his management and development was more fruitfulness. But now, working as hard as you can, things go wrong. Things don't work. There are gophers in the system. There are other employees that are mean-spirited in competition.

We had two former students who did a brilliant startup, with wonderful, amazing ideas, so good that they were bought out by a major company. Bought out by the company in which they had gotten this idea and the company didn't want to pursue it and gave them permission to take it outside and do it on their own. And so the company bought it up and they thought, "oh, good, now we can use the marketing of the company to get this out there". Well, the company bought it to bury it. It would make the company's global work far more effective. But the company wanted to bury this idea because, it would cost, I think it was 15,000 jobs. It would make things that much more efficient. So they were living out these thorns and thistles in the sense of futility of here. We poured everything in, our families sacrificed. We sacrificed and look what it ended up with.

But redemptively, as they turned to the Lord, what did the Lord do? The Lord had taught them so much. And those skills went with them to their next jobs. And it led to more balance in the families and the marriages by actually getting out of it. The Lord always has the last word, and you work unto the Lord, not necessarily for what comes from all the labor immediately. But the Lord never wastes anything. So the Lord is always redemptive as we turn to Him. But it's really helpful to see out of this, out of the fall, and this helps us to actually be part of the Lord's redemptive work in one another's lives. To know that when a man is really struggling, chances are very good that what he is struggling with at the core is frustration about how his work projects are going or about how it's seeming to turn out, or are things ordered at home the way that he thinks they need to for things to flow smoothly. Various forms of functional frustration. It's very helpful for his wife to understand that even though those things bother her too, they don't go as deeply in her. The things that go equally deep in her are the relational issues. It may be in the family, in the marriage, or in the relations in the workplace or the lab. But that goes to the core, and it's helpful for each of them as they are listening to the other with the frustrations and despair, even deep despair, to know that what is bothering you that might not bother me that much goes to the same depth that my counterpart goes. And so I can be compassionate.

We like to say that both male and female see the same things. We don't notice all the same things, and that varies from person to person, even of the same gender. But in looking at the overall picture, the functional aspects of that big picture tend to be more foreground as a man looks at that overall picture. The personal interpersonal elements tend to be more background. They're in the picture. Now, for a woman, it's the reverse. The personal interpersonal issues and frustrations will be more foreground. The functional will be there. She won't notice everything her husband notices, and neither will he notice everything she notices actually in any part of the picture, but all the relational personal interpersonal stuff is very foreground to her, and the functional things are more background. It's also helpful to know this to be able to help each other. I know Steve used to get really frustrated at times. He would ask me why I was compassionate with others, but you're not with me, when I'm frustrated. And I said, well, when you're frustrated, your prickles stick out like a pine cone because you're so frustrated. But if you could just tell me I'm feeling overwhelmed, if you could tell me what's behind it, then that just enables me to move in with compassion and join with you instead of stepping back because of the prickles. He's now able to do that, and it's really set me free to move in.

A counterpart to that is it used to frustrate him no end when we had agreed on the family schedule and then I was completely off it because I had an opportunity to help people out on the playground with the kids or I was doing too much with our children after bedtime. At first, that was so frustrating because we'd agreed on the order and then I wasn't following it. But as Steve understood how deeply that pulled at me, instead of frustration, he was able to help me with it with grace.

A good example of this is many wives are frustrated because their husband comes home from work and they ask him, how was your work day? He says, we made real progress on widget number one. It's kind of a mess with widget number two. Widget number three thinks we're a real failure and so forth. Her complaint is, I didn't ask him what he did. I asked him how his day was. She wants to know how it affected him personally. As he is telling her, describing his day in his terms, in between the lines, is the information she's looking for. Most overtly, he will talk about the things, but if she listens to the way he describes those things, she'll get the hints at what she wants. The other thing is he's not as good at verbalizing the things that she's looking for. In fact, he may not even be aware of them because he's so busy focusing on the physical, functional, logistical, procedural stuff.

It's very easy for the adversary, who is always seeking to get at us because we're representatives of the Lord to insinuate that the other person knew and didn't care. For Steve, it would be easy for him to think, "I knew I had in mind the schedule" and I just didn't care. I blew it off. And it would be easy for me to think that when he was talking about functional things and it sounded really condemning to me, it wasn't that he just didn't care about me personally. It was that his focus was on the functional and he didn't realize that it was coming out in ways that were personally hurtful. Because his focus was just on the functional frustration. This is just functional. And then I learned through the ally the Lord had given me, there's no such thing as anything that isn't personal. It may not be primarily personal. It may not be focused on what's personal, but everything has personal implications. This is a three-dimensional world. Everything has spiritual implications. Everything has functional implications. Everything has personal implications.

An example of this involves Ray Steadman, pastor for decades and decades at Peninsula Bible Church. Well, when he and Elaine, who became his wife, were engaged, it was during World War II and he was stationed in Hawaii. And so she flew out and stayed with his pastor so that they could get a rare date night. It was a long-distance courtship. They really didn't know each other. I made a comment to them once about, you know, "you knew each other really well", and Elaine said, "no, we didn't. We scarcely knew each other at all!"

On a rare date night., Elaine must have kicked herself that she wasn't ready right when he arrived. Ray and the pastor got into a huge theological argument over baptism because the pastor had changed his approach and Ray, from a biblical standpoint, vehemently disagreed. Two hours later, they were still going at it. And Elaine was back upstairs in tears, praying to God, "are you sure you want me to marry this guy?" And God had a very clear answer for her: "get used to it. It's who I've created. This is the man you're marrying. He's a man who's passionate about truth. And it isn't that he doesn't care about you. It's that he is first and foremost passionate about truth." They would chuckle over it. We're not telling tales. They actually made this public knowledge. They balanced out as they both grew. It would be easy for her to say he just doesn't care when in fact he did, but he had gotten caught with the functional passion of making sure to further truth and lost sight of the date night.

Understanding these things can help so much in untangling communication, in being compassionate, in praying for rather than accusing, even in my head, and being able to be effective in coming alongside to help rather than ending up adding to the problem.

We're in overtime, but we're going to finish the text that we were supposed to cover and were going to cover last night. If you need to go, go, but at least for the sake of the recording, we're going to go ahead.

Redemptive working. What else the Lord did? Genesis 3, verse 20. The man called his wife Eve. Life. Because she was the mother of all living. He got it. He got the significance of the Lord's message to her. And he treasured her instead of trashing her. The Lord made garments of skin for Adam and his wife Eve and clothed them. Basically saying, you got the right idea, but you didn't go far enough. You need durable covering for what you're ashamed of. And it wasn't their physical nakedness, though it's, at least in many societies, it's taken on that sort of thing.

We can't just expose everything about our lives. We would all be so driven apart that everybody would be totally isolated. I've said many times if our thoughts were teletyped across our foreheads, we wouldn't have any relationships left. The Lord wants us to learn how to deal with what comes up from the flesh internally rather than spreading it all over people and learning to bring Him to one another. The Lord is gracious. He's not condemning. Convicting, but not condemning. And He's merciful.

The Lord God said, "Behold, the man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil." We have confirmation in the text. What the tempter said, your eyes will be opened. Yes, they were. The tempter said, you'll become like God, knowing good and evil. He was right. But he was taking things that were factually correct, and as we like to say today, he's a master spin doctor. He used them to imply what was not true and used that to manipulate.

Now, lest he stretch out his hand, take also from the tree of life and eat and live forever, the Lord sent him out from the Garden of Eden to serve the ground from which he was taken. He drove the man out, and to the east of the Garden of Eden, He stationed the cherubim and the flaming sword, which turned in every direction to guard the way to the tree of life.

Now, what is the significance? You can't get to real life from God without getting past the flaming sword. Symbolically, flame is judgment and sword is death. The only way to get to real life, free from the effects of the fall, is to accept God's judgment of the reality of my sin, my ungodliness, and to be willing to have all of that put to death. Then I can receive real life.

This is the Lord's plan. We see this and we're beyond the historical provisions, but that's the dynamic that we're still living with. We know that all of the garbage will be gone and we will eat from the tree of life. That's the end where the Bible ends in Revelation.

Genesis 4:1: "Now the man knew his wife Eve". We talked a bit earlier about why that terminology is so significant. She conceived and gave birth to Cain, which means gotten. She said, "I have gotten a man child with the Lord," or they gloss here with the help of the Lord. What she said can be translated either "I've gotten a man child with the Lord" or "I've gotten a man child, the Lord," because syntactically Hebrew uses the preposition with as the marker of the direct object. It's ambiguous there. What is she saying? Probably both implications are true. She thinks this one is the Messiah. This is the Redeemer. This is the promised one, the Lord incarnate.

She made that declaration on the basis of what she saw and what she'd heard, but she couldn't have been more off base. Her hopes were truly dashed because he turned out to be the first murderer. She learned that long before he murdered his brother because she gave birth to his brother Abel. She named him Futility. By the time Abel comes along, she's lost hope in the next generation. In fact, Abel was the first God-fearing martyr. Wrong for the second time. Wrong in one direction the first time, wrong in the other direction the second time.

It's an example that now, post-fall, we judge by sight what's good and what's evil, what's going to lead to life and what doesn't. We're not good at it. We don't have God's capacity. We need revelation from Him. He can look at things and see whether they will produce life or not, but we can't. We need to get that from Him. We need to count on doing the reverse of what Adam did, listening or looking and choosing to do that, which is contrary to what God says. We have what God says in His written word.

We will continue next week and start digging into how we are able to find real life in all kinds of male-female relations, including especially the one-on-one male-female relationships of godly dating, courtship, and then marriage. It's true also in all relations that have the benefit of having both male and female participants, all relationships and all projects. It's very valuable to have both. Next week, we can focus on all of us as believers being the bride of Christ. We will be looking at the first three chapters and then a note at the end in chapter eight in Song of Solomon. We will be looking at the courtship and entry into the marriage, which is true and presented on multiple levels all at once. It will be a lot of fun. It's true for all of us as believers, offering huge hope and inspiration. Quite the reverse of what we've had to look at tonight. We need to recognize what we looked at tonight in order to live redemptively.

We've looked at a lot of promise and a lot of hope tonight. The reality of the downside of life in the fallen world can overshadow, but note there was a lot of cause for hope. We'll have fun going with this young couple through their dating and engagement. It is valuable to everybody, whether you're married or not, whether you're even dating or whether you're past marriage, widows, divorced, separated. It's because, as we noted in our explanation of what this quarter would be, it is also all about our relationship with our spiritual husband, Jesus. Remember, the whole point of male-female is to display God, glorify Him. Even in marriage, it's a picture of what is true of God and our relationship with God, those who have welcomed His invitation and enter in the new life within.

Let's pray. Lord, we thank You as we have insight into the horror of the fall and of the results that are in our lives and that are in the news every day, that we've heard from others as well. Thank You that all of that becomes the setting of seeing how amazing Your compassionate love and redemption is. Thank You that You, instead of just leaving us to ourselves, have reached in with compassion and love to heal us, to provide the solution in Yourself, in Your own sacrifice, and then Your life poured out to the last drop in us by the Holy Spirit. Thank You that we can now radiate Your presence in a way that goes way beyond what Adam and Eve could do. We ask to grow as fast as we can so that we bring You to the people and animals and all that is in our stewardship, care, and spheres of influence, that we would bring You there more and more. Thank You for Your mercy, Your love, and Your power to save, including in male-female relationships. In Your name, amen.