> Oh Lord, thank You that we have the privilege of gathering openly in Your name to proclaim You and to study Your word. And may we make the most of that. May we listen intently to You and welcome truth that You teach us so that we may grow and so that we can see You and know how deeply we're loved and be able to embody that love to one another and to many others, both the easy and the difficult. And we all can be easy at times and difficult at times.
> 
> Lord, thank You for the tremendous gift: that we are in this world with You and with strong hope because of You. Thank You that no matter what is going on in circumstances or with people, we have the privilege of walking with You and being part of Your work in a broken world. Lord, strengthen and encourage each of us tonight. Speak to us from Your word. Thank You for all that we've learned through these many months in Philippians. And Lord, would You please gel that for us and continue to speak tonight. Thank You for each one of our brothers and sisters here. Please use this for tremendous encouragement, where each of them are walking. In Your name, Amen.

**Review: Learn, Practice, and Share With Others**

As you know, this is our last time together in Philippians, and hopefully you have grown tremendously. We certainly have. We've taught this book, read it (as I'm sure you have too) multitudes of times; but this time through, since fall and winter, we have definitely grown and seen more than we ever saw and seen the Lord more. We hope that that's true of you as well. Tonight, we finish our look at Philippians, hoping to spur each of us to continue to go back and revisit what the Lord has taught us, solidify walking in it as well as being equipped to share it with others.

I was just talking with someone a few days ago who heard the Philippians 4 teaching on anxiety. And she has had opportunities to teach quite a few people from that truth since then. And that's our encouragement for each of us: to really welcome, solidify, and walk in each section of this gem of a book and then share it.

**A Thank-You Note**

Tonight, we're in the last section of Philippians 4, a thank you note from Paul to his beloved Philippians for their generous support while he was in prison under house arrest in Rome. The Romans provided housing and company (the guards he was chained to); but everything else was "bring-your-own." If you were going to eat, if you had a blanket, anything that you might need had to come through your family, your friends, or you did without. And so Paul is thanking them for their support: sent from, in that time, far away Philippi all the way to Rome a generous package for his care brought by a brother who loved him and who almost lost his life bringing it.

Embedded in Paul's thank you note is hard-won, honed truth that he is sharing, that he has learned over a lifetime of ministry and life with the Lord: how to cultivate contentment in the midst of all kinds of circumstances. And he also clues us into the much broader blessings in giving and receiving, beyond just money and food. He gives glimpses of the "much more" that the Lord accomplishes through that.

So tonight should be a rich night for us. And we'll complete this time by returning to the issue, the area of joy, because Philippians is the letter of joy. It's not just contentment, but joy. Part of that will give you hints and let you continue on your own.

We're looking forward to this time together. Steve has sent the text. Would someone like to read the whole passage 4:10-23?

**Philippians 4:10-23**

> "But I am greatly joyful in the Lord that now at last you have grown to think of me again; indeed you were concerned, but you were lacking opportunity.
> 
> Not that I speak according to want, for I have learned to be satisfied in whatever circumstances I am. I know both how to humble myself to accommodate lacks and I know how to abound in prosperity; in anything and everything I have learned the secret both to be sated and to be hungry, both to abound and to need; I am able to do everything through the One strengthening me.
> 
> Nevertheless, you have acted rightly in sharing with me in my affliction. For you yourselves also know, Philippians, that in the beginning of the gospel, that as I departed from Macedonia, not one church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving except you alone, since even in Thessalonica you sent more than once for my need.
> 
> Not that I seek for the gift, but I seek for the fruit abounding into your account. But I am in receipt of everything and abound, having been made full by receiving from Epaphroditus that which is from you, a fragrant aroma, a welcome sacrifice, well-pleasing to God. And my God shall fulfill all your needs according to His riches and glory in Christ Jesus.
> 
> And to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
> 
> Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren with me greet you. All the holy ones greet you, especially the ones of the household of Caesar.
> 
> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit."

**Great Joy**

Thank you very much. We'll be interactive tonight; so this should be fun. We're starting with joy again (great joy). And he says, "At last you've grown to think of me again." So what's the joy? He is there alone in prison (except for guards chained to him every four hours around the clock). It would be easy to wonder, "Have I been abandoned?" Suddenly he receives this gift brought by a brother he loves, and the result is great joy. It's not just, "Oh good, I'll be able to eat." It's joy. That's the first thing he mentions because they've remembered him. That's quite a remembrance to bring an extensive gift all the way from Philippi. So already there's a hint it's much more than just monetary exchange. There's joy in this care in a time when it's needed.

> Student: There's joy that they are being faithful stewards of what God has given them. There's joy in the companionship of the friend that they sent. It's not the material things, but the unseen, realizing that things are going as God plans.

Beautiful. Exactly. So again, he's seeing the fruit of God at work in them. One of his baby churches. They're growing. That's great joy for him, just like for parents seeing children grow in the Lord and people that we've poured into to see them grow. There's no greater joy than that.

**Remembering**

So he says, "Indeed, you were concerned." He knows that he wasn't forgotten. "But you lacked opportunity." [That's quite a way to class where he is in prison: opportunity.] It's actually remarkable because they may have been out of touch for years. Paul was imprisoned in Caesarea Maritima for several years followed by a long journey to Rome as a prisoner of Caesar to stand trial before him. It's much more remarkable than all of us who are able to be in touch with one another so easily. It's impressive that they heard about his situation and went to great lengths to express their love to him. They seized a tremendous opportunity, as Marianne noted, for more than just material giving. They remembered him. They cared for him for years, even when they probably heard nothing. It's like the pioneers out West saying goodbye to family, with no news for years, yet still caring and rejoicing when they finally hear.

**What the Lord Has Taught Paul*8

Paul now addresses where he has been during this time, offering insight into the riches the Lord taught him. I'm sure that this is not where he started. Paul was very human. In Philippi, he was followed by a demonized girl proclaiming, "These are servants of the most high God, listen to them." He patiently endured for several days before casting out the demon in annoyance.

Later, when he was brought before the high priest and the Sanhedrin, the high priest commanded that he be struck on the cheek. His immediate rejoinder was, "God will strike you, you whitewashed wall." And so we know he's very human. And they said, "Don't you know, that's the high priest?" Because the office got traded around, he didn't know that man was the high priest that year.

So, we know he's human, and what he's sharing with us is hard-won truth. We know that he hiked on foot over a thousand miles before reaching the Philippians through rough, mountainous, and robber-filled areas of Asia Minor as well as trade routes protected by Roman soldiers. He has been in very, very tough situations. And he's talking about having learned the secret of contentment. And here Steve has translated that as satisfied, to be satisfied. But it's also the concept of contentment.

The Puritans called this the rare jewel of contentment, because it is not normal for human beings. How many people around you walk in contentment? How often do I walk in contentment? What shows up instead is anger, depression, anxiety, stress, and driven-ness.

**Student Thoughts On Contentment**

We were interactive with the students last night. [The reason I'm doing the main teaching tonight is because Steve stayed with Regal. We're both here tonight, which is wonderful.] I asked them, what is involved with the concept of contentment? What is and isn't part of it? Do you have thoughts on that?

> [Student #1] It's got a calm and an equanimity. It's not the absence of problems. It's the weighted keel that sails through the waters without going up and down. That's an image that comes to me. You're not desperately seeking something.

> [Student #2] I'm going to borrow a phrase from Steve. "Contentment is me feeling snug in the Lord." I had a very good surgery procedure, and He was right there. Now I just have to face my condominium association.

We prayed that you would experience the Lord's presence tangibly. You've seen the Lord and you will see the Lord.

> [Student #3] In our materialistic society, being content or satisfied is not having to have the next thing or the perfect widget, making do with what is bountiful and far above so much of the world. To think that we need more than what we have is crazy.

We don't have to spend money we don't have to buy things we don't need to impress people we don't like.

One thing the students brought up is that some people think of contentment as just being "fat and happy," just hanging out, not needing to move. Years ago, there was a young woman who loved the Lord, dating someone, but she started to have real questions about whether he was actually a believer. She finally asked him, "What's your goal in life?" He said, "I just want to be happy and have peace, including with people around me." She said, "Well, that's Buddhist." Her heartbeat was, "I want to grow in the Lord. I want to use the gifts that I have to serve Him." She realized they were headed in two completely different directions, so she cut off the relationship and is so thankful she did. He pursued his path, and she has grown and been so fruitful in the Lord, now married to someone who is likewise pursuing the Lord and serving. This contentment is not just being happy and peaceful. It's dynamic. There's nothing sedentary about Paul unless he's chained. He was so active. Drawing on all of what we looked at in Philippians, what are Paul's ambitions?

> [Student #4] It's to see the word of the Lord spread to new people in new areas and that the word goes out. Another aspect of contentment, other than the materialist side, is being content to see what God has laid out for you every day to use the gifts He's given you.

**Contentment in the Process of Growing**

In Philippians 1, Paul doesn't know whether he will live. [That's not his business; he had other things to be concerned about.] This is Philippians 1:20 "according to my earnest expectation and hope that I shall not be put to shame in anything but with all boldness Christ shall even now as always be exalted in my body whether through life or through death."

He's saying this contentment is reflected in what he's just said. In Philippians 2:17, another of his ambitions is "being poured out for the sacrifice and service of your faith." His passion is to encourage people to the Lord and to grow. As Jesus said in Matthew 28:19, "As you are going [not go, but as you go], make disciples," ones who will keep learning from Jesus. That's one of his great joys as he sees his dear believers growing in the Lord and serving as well.

There is nothing sedentary about this sort of contentment. But what kind of ambition is it? What are factors that cause discontent? Is it dependent on circumstances? Is it dependent on what the people in my life are doing? Is it dependent on what's going on nationally, internationally? Is it dependent on the weather? What's going on with my health? There are many changeable factors in our lives, many of which are not under our control. Is this kind of contentment dependent on any of those?

> [Student:] As we've been learning, the answer is, "No." But as we live and walk along, the answer probably varies. There's a theoretical and a practical answer. In saying that, I'm not at all abandoning what we're being pointed to; but I want to be honest.

And as I was saying, I think this is hard-won, honed truth that Paul has learned to walk in. He didn't start out that way. We know how human the disciples were. They didn't start out this way, and we don't either. Paul was a super Pharisee. [They were professional fault finders. So he didn't start out contented.] He was part of the law police in Israel and felt like he was bringing in Messiah by doing that. If only these masses would obey every inch, every bit of the law, then the Messiah would come. ["Stop. Don't try to scrape off that drop of ice cream that fell on your shirt. You're doing work. You're doing laundry on the Sabbath." That sounds absurd, but I think that's not much of an exaggeration, if it's an exaggeration at all.]

**Contentment in Both Plenty and Need**

There's an interesting point here. He talks about both sides. Why is it the secret of contentment when we're full, in times of luxury? The times of need we can understand. It's a secret of contentment to really walk in that when there's need. Paul talks later about need and affliction. We know that he really knows what he's talking about: beatings, shipwrecks, being left for dead, stoned, whipped, imprisoned. He has really been through it. His body must have looked like a wreck and must have been painful everywhere.

[Speaking of bodies that looked like a wreck, when John D. Rockefeller was in his early 30s, every major U.S. newspaper had his obituary ready to print. He looked like he was in his 80s or 90s, very decrepit. At that time, he was asked, probably more than once, "How much is enough money?" His customary reply was, "Just one more dollar." He came to the Lord, and his physical age, his body showed, he dropped back a half a century practically overnight. He became content. Not only that, he learned to give. He couldn't really give back what he had plundered people to get, but he gave back to humanity in general. People are generally not content.]

> [Students:] I think a reason that it's hard to be content in abundance is: it's just the abundance is what you focus on. You get distracted, and you're caring about it and for it. You're worshiping the creature rather than the Creator. It can be not only the "one more dollar thing," but if you feel you have been instrumental in getting there, the pride aspect can sneak in. Instead of being thankful to God that you happen to be in a season of abundance (and tomorrow you may be a season of need, but He's going to meet both of those), you get yourself into it. Then that's not good.

You may remember Deuteronomy is the Lord preparing His people to finally enter the land. He says, "When you dwell in houses you have not built and drink from cisterns that you did not dig and eat from orchards that you did not plant, guard yourselves, lest you think that, 'I made all of this wealth' and you turn away from the Lord." It's very easy to turn from the Creator to the creation, and it can consume us. It seems like it's necessary for life to be good. Or you think, "Look what I did." There's not as much of a sense of need for reliance on the Lord.

We've realized it's like students going home for Christmas vacation. They've been working hard at their academics. Believers have been serving a lot and growing a lot, and they get home and just want to hang out and collapse. Guess what comes out? Their walk with the Lord just disappears. Home can be the hardest place to walk with the Lord. The parents are saying, "You haven't changed. You say you've changed, but you haven't." All the reflexes to respond to things the same old way that you have been working hard to walk away from and leave behind come out. You get home, and you're not consciously trying to walk with the Lord. You get into a familiar situation, and you just start cruising on autopilot. The problem is the autopilot is programmed with all the old stuff.

**What Blocks Contentment?**

We've already been talking about some of this: What blocks contentment? There are different factors. It's helpful to address that. Having that ideal, it's helpful to see what blocks it. We say, "Yes, Lord, I want to go for that." But we don't recognize what those blocks are or address them. It's actually very helpful to say, "What types of things make me discontented?"

> [Student:] Outside of the adversary, stress and anxiety, and that could be the adversary himself. He doesn't want people to be content. I've got a meeting tomorrow with my condominium association, and I'm petrified.

We will pray, and we can pray with you tonight. You hit the category that I was thinking of immediately. What blocks contentment: People doing what I don't like them doing (a broad category).

> [Student:] For me, I don't need the new car or the new fancy gadget. I'm happy with what I have as long as it's not broken. When something breaks, because I'm the engineer, I really want it fixed and taken care of. The disorder will block contentment unless I say, "Okay Lord, this broken widget, whatever it is, this is Yours too. If You want it fixed, You can do this. But if I'm supposed to sit in this for a while, that's okay too."

It's helpful (as we looked at a couple of weeks ago) to recognize that our personal idols always lead to discontent. We've looked at the multitude of things that can be idols, conceptual images of what I have to have for life to be good or have to experience for life to be good or can't experience. Wherever those are in place (and often they're good things, but taken to an extreme of what I have to have for life to be good or successful), there is no end to them.

As a student, I worked at the faculty club and served various faculty members who had received Nobel Prizes. But were they content? No, because "I reached the top there. But there have to be other summits I can climb." The drive is to continue to be the top, the best, to outdo everybody else. "Maybe I've got a Nobel Prize, but maybe not as many other prestigious things that other people have or as many Nobel Prizes as others." Linus Pauling did great stuff; but after he got a second Nobel Prize, he became obsessed with trying to be the first person to get a third Nobel Prize.

It's very helpful when you look at areas of discontent to ask, is there one or usually several idols there? It could be being famous, wealthy, wanting recognition from people that matter to me. (It doesn't mean from everybody, but from the people that matter to me.)

We have a friend who was driving her car on Woodside, small little roads with no traffic control signs. She came to one of those intersections where nobody had a stop sign. The car that was the later arrival tried to jam in front of her, and the driver jumped out of his car and started yelling at her. She knew who it was—a well-known figure, high up in the halls of Silicon Valley, wealth and fame, hierarchy, and so forth. Finally, he said, "Do you know who I am?" She said, "No, but if we look around, I'm sure we can find somebody here who can tell you." In the process, she told him who he was in terms that he was not looking for.

Idolatry is one area, either positive or negative, that can lead to discontent. 

> [Student:] What about all kinds of politicians, which we're certainly seeing nowadays?

What would Paul say about whether contentment depends on what the politicians are doing? Remember, Nero was on the throne at that point, one of the most despicable people who's ever lived, with complete, absolute control over the whole empire. Is contentment dependent on what politicians are doing or not doing? No, not at all. We need to pray for them, but that does not need to stand in the way of our contentment. It gives an opportunity for service through prayer, and prayer is always needed. Sometimes we're aware of that need more than others. This is a time when we're very aware. A lot of prayer is needed. The Lord works on national and international levels as we pray, far more powerfully than we tend to think.

> [Students:] We need Him more than ever. If our contentment is based upon people in any shape or form, we will be disappointed, to say the least, because we're all fallen human people. Even when politics seems to be going awry from our personal perspective, we've got to say God is doing things. Like right now, Europe is pulling together in a way that they would not if we were still the same strong, rational United States. This may all be just setting up Europe for the return of Christ. God knows what His agenda is, and it won't necessarily be one we like for our own personal, not personal to us, but the country's perspective.

He is on the move in Europe right now, from reports we're getting. My sister in Sweden has been reporting on many in Sweden coming to the Lord. It's still a minority for sure, but the Lord is on the move in a way that He has not been for quite a while. People, young people, are coming to the Lord for the first time because of being so aware of the needs that are frightening. The Lord is on the move, so we need to pray. Our contentment comes from getting to serve Him.

**The Link Between Contentment and Prayer**

Let's go back in Philippians to the contentment that comes from praying. What's the link between prayer and contentment? Find the text. Where is the statement in Philippians from the Lord through Paul about the contentment that results from prayer?

> [Student:] Are you talking about verse 6 and 7? "Be anxious for nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God, and the peace of God, which surpasses all comprehension, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus."

The first thing to do in pursuit of contentment is to pray. Pray to the One from whom all blessings come. Literally all blessings, anything that in any way causes or enhances real life, is from the Lord and only from the Lord through many different agencies. But the source is always the Lord, and it is tapped into through prayer.

People commonly think that prayer is beating on God and trying to get Him to relent and be a nice guy. No! Prayer is about our welcoming God doing what He promises to do and what He longs to do, but which cannot have its impact if it's not received freely by us, if it's not welcomed. We react against it because we're not in control. Something's being forced on us. God knows that you can't force love on anybody because they'll react to being forced. They'd rather be miserable than be blessed by force. That's the nature of the flesh. Independence, autonomy, self-sufficiency is the be-all and end-all of the flesh. It's all about me.

I'm sure Erica has mentioned a couple of times this year about the student who came up after we talked about relationships. He came up in all sincerity. This is a student who loved the Lord and was eagerly following the Lord, but he came up, and he looked like a deer in the headlights, "You mean it's not all about me?" It was a huge life-changing moment. He really got it and is now beautifully married to the girl he had just started to date at that point. He learned the all-important lesson right at the beginning: "It's how can I serve the Lord to bless her? I don't enter into a relationship so that I can get from the other person." Most relationships are entered into that way, but that's not the way to enter into a relationship that will be God-centered and God-blessed and full of joy and contentment.

> [Student:] I remember when I studied, a long time ago, about the word "supplication" in "by prayer and supplication." It meant "earnest through and through, every single inch of your desire." It really helped. When you go in depth to that degree, that real peace does come upon you.

Notice the connection, between the English term "supplication" and the English term "supply." If you need supplies, you make a list. What supplies do you need? And that's what the Lord is saying. "I'm eager to supply all your needs. What needs are you aware of that you'd like Me to supply? Tell Me about it."

It's not just verbiage. It's earnestly bringing it to Him, knowing that He delights to give. He's my good shepherd who's here. As we've noted, it actually starts with verse 4 of chapter 4: "Rejoice in the Lord always, I say rejoice. Let your forbearing be known to all men." I don't need to force others. The Lord is literally here. One of the students asked, where do you start to move from discontent to content? Get the Lord in view. That's what Paul is doing here. He's rejoicing.

**Contentment When It's Hard**

Remember what Paul and Silas did in the Philippian jail after their backs had been ripped to shreds and they were chained in the stocks where the rats could get at their bloody backs. And they couldn't do a thing about it, but they were singing praises to God at midnight and praying, and all of the people in the jail were listening. They started with praises and thanksgiving, rejoicing that it wasn't just the two of them. They were in prison, but the Lord was right there with them, and so they could rejoice in His presence even though physically they must have been miserable and didn't know what was going to happen.

They could have been anxious about what was going to happen in the morning, "Are we going to survive the night? We've just been beaten to shreds, and now what?" Instead, they chose to "be anxious for nothing." Instead of letting it consume them, they went to the Lord with thanksgiving, "Thank You, Lord, You're here. Thank You that You're the Redeemer. Thank You that You sent us here." Remember, the Spirit blocked them from reaching out in Asia Minor. Then Paul had the vision at night of the Macedonian saying, "Come and help us." So they knew the Lord called them there.

One question is, "When we know the Lord has called us somewhere, what is our expectation?" We assume, "It's going to be so successful. This is going to just take off. It will be awesome." What happened? It did take off starting with the women at the river. There were not enough Jewish men to form a synagogue. So they went to the river where women prayed while doing their washing and the church began. But when Paul cast the demon out of that girl, all hell breaks loose and they're in prison.

It would be easy to say, "Lord, You called us here. Is this what You mean?" Very often that's the case. When the Lord calls us to something, it's not just thundering success all the way. It's the upward, steep graph of success that we all love. But this includes a lot of difficulties and challenges. As we trust the Lord, we grow in our trust. It's not dependent on the circumstances. "You're doing something far bigger than we are and at the moment, I haven't a clue."

Discontentment may come from issues you're having with accepting where you are, whether physically or in any figurative sense. If you think you would be a lot more contented in a different situation, different circumstance, different location, then the best way to get contented is to become content with where you are because it's no accident. Thank the Lord for where you are and welcome His accomplishing whatever He wants to accomplish there. When He's accomplished what He wants to accomplish in the situation you're in, whatever defines it, then He will take you where He can work another blessing in you. Let Him finish what He wants to do where you are before trying to insist on going somewhere else.

**Contentment From Focusing on the Lord**

> [Student:] Contentment follows also from trust, realizing that God is large and in charge. In the Lord's Prayer, "Thy will be done, Thy kingdom come" is knowing that He is dealing with all of this and the wonderful tapestry of our lives and all of creation that He is weaving. Just looking at the Old Testament and how Christ fits into so many of the prophecies, He is an extremely detailed, not person, because He's not a person, but personality. Trusting in that and that He's going to see it all to fruition greatly helps in contentment.

Yes, it does. One of the students spoke up immediately last night and said, "I need to fill my whole focus with the Lord again and see Him before I can look at the circumstances." And that indeed is what we saw in verses eight and nine of chapter four: "Where do I focus?" Is it on all that I can count on in the Lord's character? Or is it focusing on, "Lord, this is so terrible?"

Thank you. I'm agreeing with what you said, presuming when you said "He's not a person," you mean "He's not merely a human being." He is a person. He's the ultimate person from which we can learn about being personal. It's clear what you were and weren't saying; but I wanted to emphasize for clarity what I'm confident you were not saying.

> [Student:] He was human. However, He was not only a little human. He is much bigger.

Yes. Stepping back, look at, from Scripture, who I know my Lord to be. Thank Him for that. Praise Him for what I know of His character: "If anything excellent, if anything worthy of praise, let your mind dwell on these things" (4:8).

Where have I already seen God at work? We lose that in the midst of what is distressing us. And then ask, "Lord, how can I join You in redemptive action here?" From verse 9, "What you've learned and seen and heard in me, practice these things and the God of peace will be with you." I get to be part of His work in a bad situation. So much of what we've looked at is what it takes to build this lifestyle of contentment, especially when the circumstances would not supply any of it.

As we were looking last night with the students: What can block contentment? Remember in 2:12, "So then my beloved, just as you've always obeyed, not in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your salvation [grow - it's the growing part] with fear and trembling, for it is God who's at work in you, both to will and to work for His good pleasure." He's here. Whatever He's called us to, He's right here to supply what we need to do it as we turn to Him.

**Not Grumbling**

The first example in 2:14 is the last thing I would have expected. I would have expected, "Go be this great evangelist" or something like that. But instead, we're told "do all things without grumbling or disputing." What? Continuing in 2:15, "For as such, you appear as lights in the world." It's not normal. I have found that inner grumbling is a huge block to contentment.

Step back and listen closely to your brain chatter. What's flowing through my mind? I was shocked to realize how much of the time what was running through my mind was an evaluation of, "Do I like this? Do I not like this? Is this what I would have done? No, it's not." And, you know, this was all commenting on discontent. "Is this comfortable to me? No, it's not." It's really listening to the brain chatter of the flesh. There are times where I felt like pulling my flesh out and saying, "Are we feeling sorry for ourselves?"

Realize that it's so easy when we're passive to end up just with the focus on all the discontents and grumbling. And the inner grumbling leads to outward disputing. Then I'm arguing to try to get others to fulfill what I think will make me or us happy. It's all about me. It may be all about making things good for us, but it's my view of what will make things good for us now.

It's very helpful to look not only at what builds contentment that is not at all dependent on circumstances or people, but also at what blocks this sort of life. Especially in my life, I think the grumbling and disputing pinpoint some of that. Am I saying, "Things are not the way I would have engineered them, to use your term, Marianne, but using it more broadly—not just things broken but life seeming broken?" It's very easy to say basically, "God, enough already. I've been through enough. Haven't I been through enough?" And yet there's one more thing to feel sorry for myself.

I certainly had times of feeling that when I was in the hospital. They were keeping me there because of fluid around the heart, and it's life-threatening. I wanted to go home so I could get some sleep. Hospitals are not a place to get rest. [Confinement is life-threatening.] I want to be able to walk. They decided I'm a fall risk, so I had to get somebody in just to go to the bathroom. I'm not in control of anything. It's very easy to feel sorry. [They're billing you for it, paying a whole lot of money to be imprisoned and maltreated.]

**The Blessing on the Other Side of the Difficulty**

I could have stayed in that mood: "Lord, haven't I been through enough? It's been years now of one thing after another. Poor me. Lord, just get me out of here." I could have stayed so discontent that I missed the answer: "It's been years, but it's working, isn't it? Look at all the growth. Look at all the witness."

I could have stayed focused on my experience and whether I liked it or not. Or I could say, "Thank You, Lord. I wouldn't have chosen this. I would not have written it into my life scenario. But thank You for it. I present myself to You to be part of what You're doing. Thank You that I'm not here alone. I'm here with You. Even when the lady next door right across the curtain is screaming and crabbing at the staff because they're not doing what she wants, thank You. Thank You, Lord, that You're here. Thank You that You have Your purposes, and I present myself to You to be part of it."

There were so many opportunities to minister to medical staff. I felt so joyful. I just felt like dancing. [You had to get permission to do that. You had to get somebody to stabilize you while you danced.] I did disobey the rules when the nurse I was ministering to said at 2:30 in the morning said, "Oh, I wish we could hug each other." I jumped out of bed and said, "Why not?" I jumped out of bed, tubes and all, and gave her a bear hug. I said, "This hug's from God. You know He meant us to meet." She said, "I know," through her tears. Once I turned from "What's happening to me? Do I like it?" to "Thank You, Lord, I'm here on Your business, and I present myself to You to go for it. I entrust to You my desire to get home for whenever that is, if ever it is." ["You are home. Home is where I, the Lord, am. And I'm everywhere."] It just set me free to be part of what He was doing. There was so much joy. Even though I was still being poked and prodded and given injections in the stomach, it didn't matter. It wasn't the big deal that it was earlier.

**Practice**

Look for the typical places that are blocking you from this kind of life, and then recognize it. Is there some idolatry here? Are there things that I've said are an absolute that need to be for life to be good? Renounce that in prayer and welcome instead, "What does the Lord call me to?" Philippians 4 is a great place to start.

Look ahead. Prepare with the Lord. I know where this sort of thing is going to come up. There are certain people in our extended family that know how to "push my buttons." Prepare ahead to be part of the Lord's redemptive work. Thank the Lord that they're in my life so that I can grow and not return evil for evil or insult for insult, but give a blessing instead. Look at the opportunity. Prepare ahead so that when it happens (not if, because these are repeated things), I'm already prepared with the Lord to move in His new pattern. Don't be like a soldier who hasn't done all the exercises, "I'm on the battlefield and oh no, which end of the gun is up and how do I shoot it?" We end up just falling back into old stuff. But if you recognize what's triggering this, and do business with the Lord, and then look ahead with Him and prepare ahead, then you're ready to walk. You're looking for opportunities to walk in this new lifestyle. We talk about stepping back, and that's good.

We are used to thinking of stepping back as stepping back from something. It's good to step back from being too close in, to get a broader perspective and see it more in context of other things. But the concept that we tend not to have is stepping back to. Have no distracting care. Don't let anything take your attention off the Lord. Our attention is constantly being taken off the Lord. When we have our attention on the Lord, don't let anything pull it off. Much of the time, our attention is off the Lord, and we need to step back to Him to get perspective from His point.

I like to say, "The cross is the best seat in the house." The cross is not fun, but you do have the best seat in the house because it's only Jesus at the crucifixion who has the perspective to see the reality of what's going on. Now, what He experienced, I'm not saying He's there detached, thinking, "Oh great, this is so much fun because I can see what's going on." No, it isn't. He did get joy from knowing what the cross would accomplish. It really is true that the view from the cross is the real perspective. We get that view only when we accept a calling to sacrificial love, unjust suffering. It's recognizing God's purpose in it instead of just getting consumed by the experience, which may be anything from just uncomfortable to literally excruciating, which means like being crucified. Step back to whenever I feel like I don't have perspective. Step back to the One who has perfect perspective and can help me to gain that or regain it where I had it and lost it. There's plenty that I never had that I can gain perspective also.

**Proper and Improper Use of My Mind**

> [Student:] Steve, something you just said highlights a significant aspect of this teaching that I hadn't realized before. Where I fail many times is trying to use my mind or intellect to solve a problem. There are always relationships, right? Business would be easy if we didn't have employees or customers. You're trying to figure out what's going on, thinking about the best approach, the motivation, spending all this time just thinking, thinking, thinking. I think that if I analyze it better, if I understand it better, I'll get to the solution. Sometimes, with time, you do get insights. I'm not saying take away your brain. [And God isn't saying that either.] But if my first focus is whatever it is, "Lord, thank You and what are You calling me to do," then I think over time all that other stuff gets revealed with a lot less churning. There's a lot of hubris involved in thinking I can solve this. Sometimes we can solve things, but a lot of times we can't. There are too many moving parts.

God expects us to use our mind. He created our mind and has a strong purpose for it. It's an important part of our awareness of Him and hearing what He's saying to us because He doesn't speak to us in gibberish or noise. He speaks intelligently to us and His word is in familiar language to get concepts through to us. The function of the mind, once I understand what God's will is in principle, then I'm to use my mind to look at the circumstances around me and look for opportunities to execute God's will in this context. The point is not just to solve it or to figure it out for myself.

We've known people who love the Lord. We knew one man with a very powerful ministry. The weak point of his ministry was he didn't see the instructive aspect of God's Word. He didn't deny the overall or generic value of Scripture, but he was offended at the idea that God has given us instructions to follow in anything. He was firmly convinced, "God has placed me here to struggle it out and to wrestle with the constant tension in life and figure it out for myself." He was right that the mind is an important faculty given to us from God, but it's not intended to be used apart from God.

I have found when I'm thanking the Lord, that even though this isn't what I would have chosen, this is God's gift. If I'm thankful and then available, my mind works much better because I'm not fighting Him with, "It shouldn't be this way." Or if I'm not trying to figure it out, there are times where I will go to bed and entrust it to the Lord, ask for His guidance. In the middle of the night, I'll wake up with the next step of what to do, or He'll give me even a mental picture of where that thing is that is missing. Sure enough, that's where it is. If I'm thankful and then go to Him with trust that He'll guide in His time, very often I find my mind is freed up to be able to track with Him and hear more and get direction. It doesn't mean a telegram type of thing, you know, explaining every detail, but He gives enough to go on, or Scripture that definitely applies and that is a key to that situation or to what's going on. The thanksgiving and the trust really open the door for being able to hear Him.

**Giving the Lord Joy**

In our last few minutes, the last part of Philippians, I'll just ask you, rather than going through the text, what besides the gift itself is the Lord accomplishing? Because, in the issue of giving and receiving, the Lord is doing much more than just transferring goods. If we read Paul's response, the elements of the thank you note for the gift, Paul doesn't reject the gift. He expresses clear appreciation for the gift. He says that the material gift, which was needed, is supplying my needs (not my whims) and sharing with me in my affliction. He says, although it expresses the Lord's love, there is a much greater gift that the Lord wants to give. There's a much greater gift that the Lord has given me through you because of your giving. That is what's going on between you and the Lord and between you and me and between me and the Lord as a result of what you're doing, not what you're doing itself.

What do you pick up from the text on that? What specifically does he talk about that is beyond the transfer of needed care? Look at verse 17. It says "the profit which increases to your account." The thing that excites me is about what God's doing in you. I seek for the fruit abounding into your account, like the fruit of the Spirit. This is the fruit of the Spirit's working in you. They are growing in expressing the Lord, and that's His joy.

That is like a parent who sees their child or grandchild growing in the Lord, exercising their gifts and using them to bless others. There's nothing better than that. These are Paul's kids. Also, what does he say? It's growth in them, bringing the Lord's character to others. That's permanent. We don't take the stuff with us, but what we do take with us is the growth in the Lord. And that's permanent. Jesus said in John 15, "You did not choose me. I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit and bear it abundantly." It's a permanent growth that is riches forever. As I grow in expressing the Lord to others especially in tough situations where it's not normal.

In verse 18, he says, "It's a fragrant aroma, a welcome sacrifice, well-pleasing to the Lord." This is the language of the sanctuary, referring to temple worship and the smell of incense offered in worship as you trust the Lord to express Him and be part of His care for others. God is always at work to bless others. It's never about Him. He's always blessing others. As we join Him to do that, it gives the Lord Himself so much joy. He is blessed, but He doesn't seek blessing. He receives blessing as we accept His blessings, act on them, and put them to use according to his purpose in giving them to us.

This is a life that is not just physical giving, but it's whatever my personal gifts are. They're all the fruit of the Spirit as well as the spiritual gifts where I'm expressing the Lord with what I have and who I am. It gives joy to the Lord and furthers His blessing others, and it gives so much joy all the way around.

Look at the incidents of joy. At the end of your handout is a listing of all the places where joy and rejoicing show up in Philippians. We encourage you to look at those and maybe make a summary note for each one of what is Paul rejoicing in or saying we can rejoice in. There's a pattern that comes out of what yields joy and what you can rejoice in, no matter what's going on in the circumstances.

See a parallel in John's third letter (verse 4) written at the end of his life in ministry, "I have no greater joy than this, to see my children [that is those he's shepherding in the faith, those that he brought the good news to and they welcomed it and received new life -- that's why he calls them children] walking in the truth [walking in accordance to God's word]."

As we do that, as we grow in doing that, we're giving the Lord Himself tremendous joy. It's amazing that we can give the God of the universe joy. But we can each day, including through prayer for national and international things.

**Giving in the Lord's Strength**

Do I need to fear that I'm going to run out as I become one who's a giver? He said, "No." Philippians 4:13 says, "I'm able to do everything through the One who strengthens me." There are plenty of times when Steve and I say, "Lord, our strength is gone. But we trust You to fill us up to do what You call us to do." And He does. Not right at the beginning, not ahead. Usually, we feel pretty weak going in. I definitely did teaching at a women's retreat a couple of weekends ago. I felt like I was getting sick, and there were a million things crowding in. I just said, "Lord, I'm here as part of Your speaking to these women and meeting their needs. I present myself to You. I am weak and trembly and feel like I'm getting sick, but I trust You to give what I need for this time." And He did. But I had to go into it feeling weak and wobbly and just holding on to the Lord. Then the Spirit takes over.

He's doing that right now. We're both just drained, exhausted, very poured out as we're getting to the end of the quarter. Then the Lord called us to minister to some extreme difficulties, and He sustained us through it. Actually, Erica had to take a nap this afternoon. I'm glad she did. I am not a nap person. Neither am I. It's a rare event. Our girls could not believe it. One year, it was true for both of us for our birthdays. What was the thing we wanted for our birthday? A nap. Our girls thought we'd gone crazy. That was the last thing they wanted on their birthday.

He protects. He's used a couple of things: one of them is heavy snow expected over the two mountain passes we have to go over. We were planning, as we finish tonight, to get a couple of hours sleep and then get up in the middle of the night and drive 900 miles to Washington for the break and to work on the publication and see grandkids. And the Lord said, "No. (Yes, but not yet)."

We appreciate your prayers as we will probably be going over the weekend up to Washington driving. Looks like we've got a decent weather window. We've got four-wheel drive and snow tires, and we're carrying chains. I've chained up so many times that I would be glad if I don't get treated to that anymore. I don't know why we always have to chain up in bitter cold weather.

> [Student:] Is Regal going with you up there? I just didn't want him dog sat and you guys gone.

It depends on if he's still with us. He's not spending time alone at all now. He's coming with us if he's still on earth. That was another possibility. It's hard to tell. He looks like, "This is it." And then he rebounds. So he's with us as long as the Lord wants to give us that gift. When we're clear to go, unless the Lord shows otherwise, he will go with us. The only reason he wouldn't go with us is because we're staying here even longer because of him. As long as he's with us, he goes with us. But the times of leaving him for hours in the house alone are past.

This is an awesome season. It's requiring a lot of involved care, but all 13 and almost a half years with Regal have been absolutely amazing. Each season is special. This season, beyond where many would say, "He's had a good life; just end it mercifully." We are committed to not making him suffer. He's not suffering, thank the Lord. We have good pain meds, and he's getting comfort care. None of the meds interfere with his meditation. There are lots of special times. I get multiple special times with him during the night. If I get up just to go to the bathroom, I always come out and schmooze a bit with Regal. It's very special. When we're outside and it's raining, he may want to stop and be petted. He feels he needs a break now - a far cry from his running miles and miles with me years ago. It's special to stand out in the rain with him if that's what it takes. I'm waterproof, showing the Lord's love to him. We wouldn't miss this for anything. And he's thankful, showing us how to end life thankful. Talk about thanksgiving and contentment. "I've learned how to be content in whatever circumstances I am." This dog embodies that. It's amazing. For quite a while, he couldn't seem to get up. Now, he's worked at it and figured things out. It's amazing. When it's time to take him out, he practically jumps up without difficulty.

**Conclusion: It's Bigger Than We Imagine**

We're at the end of our time. The final note, verse 22, is Paul's quiet statement that "the saints, the holy ones (the ones who have the Holy Spirit) of the household of Caesar, greet you." As we noted before, how likely was it that Paul would have access to Caesar's household? Not very likely; but he had a captive audience rotating by shifts. The absolute pick of the Roman Empire of young military men was chained to Paul. Paul wouldn't go anywhere if the chains fell off. He demonstrated that in the incident in Philippi with the jail, and the chains did fall off. The Romans thought he was chained to them. What these guys learned was they were chained to him, and some responded. That's how he could write "the saints of Caesar's household," because the ones chained to Paul were Caesar's personal bodyguards, equivalent to our Secret Service Presidential Protection Division. Those guys are amazing. I had the delight of spending a weekend with one of them.

As we give ourselves to the Lord with thanksgiving and availability to serve with what we've got and what the Lord gives us, it's a total surprise what the Lord does in unexpected ways. We get to be part of a much bigger calling and a much bigger picture than we have any clue of.

**Preview of Next Quarter**

Let's pray, and then we're glad to hang out. Before anybody gets off, this is the end of this quarter. We start again on Wednesday, April 2nd. Next quarter, we will be teaching on God's wisdom for male-female relationships. This is pitched for everybody. It's really applicable to people in any and every possible situation in terms of relationships. All of us are part of the Bride of Christ, and whether you'll ever be married or are married now, this should be a huge encouragement in our spiritual marriage with Jesus and also equipping to pray for and come alongside those who are married with the Lord's encouragement and wisdom.

For singles, it gives vision of what to grow into to be "the one," not just look for "the one." The person that God is planning to connect you with when the two of you are ready is praying for "the one" too. The key is becoming "the one" that they are rightly praying for.

This will be pitched for everybody. For marriage, we're coming up on our 49th anniversary. We know that we will grow as we're in these passages. We always do. There are many times our girls would ask us, "Daddy, Mommy, what are you teaching now?" When we answered, "Marriage" they replied, "Well, I thought so" because of the challenges, opportunities for growth that come up. They prayed for us and they saw Jesus change us. A lot of their initial confidence in the Lord was, "If God can change Daddy, He can change anybody."

Please pray for our campus group, which consists of single grad students who would love to be married. Many have not come from families where they saw the real thing, and nobody's seen a perfect marriage. Our girls certainly did not. It's shocking, isn't it? [They saw pictures in Scripture of it. They saw the need for it.] We need guidance from the Lord, the Creator of marriage. We have singles, dating couples, and young married's on campus. Pray for them and for all of us, because no matter your life circumstances, this will be enriching. Part of it will be applicable to any relationship, offering wisdom for friendships and extended family. Understanding the gender factor in family members that bug you is helpful. Male and female are equal in value and ability to glorify God, but we have different contributions and specialties. There's a lot of commonality.
	
> Let's pray. Lord Jesus, thank You. Thank you so much that You are with us, that You strengthen us for all that You call us to, that You are at hand wherever we are and whatever is going on. And thank You that our ability to be content and to cultivate contentment, our joy, is not dependent on circumstances or people, but in growth that is available to us to walk with You and to rely on and to be part of Your work serving in a broken world. Thank You for the joy available to us in that. And thank You that nothing and nobody can stop me from developing this kind of contentment and joy except me.
> 
> So, Lord, lead us forward in pursuing a lifestyle with You that enables this kind of contentment and joy and freedom to serve rather than fighting, feeling sorry, trying to push our agenda, but rather to be about Yours. Thank You for the freedom and joy. In Your name. Amen.

