> Oh, Lord, we are so thankful that You are our living God, that we are never alone. We're never out of Your care. Thank You that in the midst of a crazy, broken world, You are good, and You are our Good Shepherd, and You lead us in the paths of righteousness of Your character and give us the privilege of joining with You in Your redemptive work starting in us and then working out to others. Lord, thank You that we have a future and a hope no matter what point in life any of us are. And thank You for this Thanksgiving week coming up. May it be not only a very special time with family or other people, Your people, but also genuinely a time before You of tremendous Thanksgiving and worship and praise because we have so much to be thankful for, first and foremost, You, Yourself. Thank You, Lord, for this time together and the privilege of getting together from all over the world and all over the country. And would You please give us ears to hear You? Would You please speak encouragement to each of us and fill us up so that we can walk with You more and more in active fellowship and be part of Your word. And thank You for the joy that we get to give You and You give us and we get to share with others. In Your name, amen.

**Introduction**

We have a really exciting passage tonight, and I've found it addressing a fundamental issue in each of our lives, no matter what stage of growth. It seems that we are all at times susceptible to grumbling and really evaluating life that way. And I've come to see this passage as the Lord showing us an alternative. Well, firstly, showing us how big this issue really is, and then opening the door to a wonderful alternative way of living that gives Him joy, gives us joy, gives the people around us joy.

Our text is Philippians 2:12-18 tonight, and we should get through the whole thing. Would someone like to read?

> Philippians 2:12-18. "So then, my beloved, just as you have always obeyed, not as in my presence only but now much more in my absence, work out your salvation with fear and trembling for it is God who is at work in you both to will and to work for His good pleasure. Do all things without grumbling or disputing so that you will prove yourselves to be blameless and innocent children of God above reproach in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you appear as lights in the world. Holding fast the word of life so that in the day of Christ, I will have reason to glory because I did not run in vain nor toil in vain. But even if I am being poured out as a drink offering upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice and share my joy with you all. You too, I urge you, rejoice in the same way and share your joy with me."

**Obedience from the heart**

Starting in the section, "So then, my beloved, just as you have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence." I've thought about why does Paul include that phrase. I think Paul's desire is for this obedience to be from the heart: obedience to the Lord rather than to him, whether or not the human authority figure is present. 

But beyond that, I also came to see this as Paul calling us to really internalize this, really make it yours. I've thought about in my own life, often it's actually the times after serving or before serving, where I know that I'm going to be partnering with the Lord. But usually it's after those times where I find huge temptation to just hang out in the flesh, just to be a vegetable and do nothing, or getting attacked by temptation. I think Paul is really underlining here, make this your lifestyle, whether or not you're in public. An in-season and out-of-season type of faith and lifestyle.

I loved that you underlined, "just as you always obey". How can he say that? Or why would he say that?

Erica helped with this insight last night. I think it's really this encouragement that Paul has for the Philippian believers. It's "your overall pattern has been obedience". He's encouraging and identifying what the Lord is already doing in this church, rather than what's so easy for us to do, which is identify all of the needs and things that are not quite there yet. He's identifying "actually, your overall approach is obedience" and is encouraging that forward even more. Tied with that is the little phrase, "my beloved". The root there is agape love. In the entire book, Paul prefers to use the term "brethren" to refer to these believers. At the very beginning and end of the book, he uses the word "saints". Only twice does he use this word "beloved". I just found that a wonderful reminder that our encouragement to obey, our calling to obey, is actually out of the Lord's love for us rather than a need to obey in order to obtain it.

**Obeying the Lord: not a killjoy but rather a calling to joy**

It's a gift of love, the call to walk in what He calls us to rather than an interference. We had a student years ago. We weren't working with them, but someone we were was very close. This student shook off her parents' faith and said, "at last, I can do what I want" and was headed into the party scene. We knew there were going to be deep scars pretty soon.

Instead, this is just the opposite. His call to obey is not interference with fun. It's the call to joy and full life and good impact for the long run in my life and other people's lives. It's a call of love, not of interference or lording it over. Invited into life. He's reminding them that we're all prone to do this beyond our best behavior with the people we love and respect and who've been good to us. He's reminding them that it's really God that's at work, not me. So whether I'm there or not is irrelevant. It's always God who's at work. That's why they say you really know what your character is by how you spend your time when nobody else is around or what you do when nobody else is around. Always the Lord is there, but not tangibly so. Those of us that live alone, we understand that.

It's a big test for many PhD students because, for the first time ever, they have long periods of time when no one is looking over their shoulder. It can bring out the worst, but the Lord uses it to make them aware of things that need to be changed that the Lord knew about all along. A lot of them have done a lot of personal growing on a big level through those PhD years, not just academic growth but personal growth with new awards.

This is the desire of every parent too, that children will internalize what's important. If our children are walking with the Lord from their choice, from within, even when we're not there or won't be there, they'll do fine. Even when, not if, they hit major challenges. Something to pray for. 

**Exhortation: work out your salvation with fear and trembling**

So what's Paul's command? "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who is at work in you both to will and to work for his good pleasure."

The work out your *own* salvation is wonderful. We were musing last night. The way that the flesh would like to read this is "work out the other person's salvation by making them fear and tremble, for it is I who is working on them both to will and to work for what I want them to do". It's the flesh's reading of his text. 

But instead, it's work out your own salvation. What has the Lord given me the domain and the influence over to actually change and to actually influence? The salvation here, of course, Paul is writing to believers, so he's not talking about working out your right relationship with God, which we have through the blood of His Son and trusting in Him for life. This is the working out the practice of where we live day to day.

This "fear and trembling" phrase was a little confusing for me at first. We often hear of the fear of the Lord, but the trembling piece sounds a little bit less like the reverential fear and more of the "uh-oh, he's out to get me". But I checked the other instances where the phrase appears. In just about every case Paul is tying it with obedience to the Lord. But it's also tied with joy in the midst of that. So the way I've thought about the fear and the trembling: the fear being reverential fear, looking to the Lord as our reference point for all of life. So that's answering "what's the source? What's our reference point? What are we looking at as our starting point?" Then the trembling is looking at "what's the result? What's the ending point? What's the impact?" So it's looking both at the beginning and the end of what we're really choosing as we're working out our salvation with each individual choice we make. 

Especially recognizing that the Lord tells us where choices go in His word. If I'm wise and listening intently to Him, I'm choosing life for myself and for those I impact for the long run. But if I'm blowing Him off and thinking I have a better idea, I'm choosing a form of death for myself and those I impact. It's actually very important and serious business to be listening intently and walking it with Him.

**Growth from the inside out: both to will and to work**

I've also found it wonderful, the focus that the Lord has on doing work from the inside and changing us from the inside out. Something I sadly see quite often in different young adults groups is this idea that there's the Christian life that I need to conform to externally. And,  having tried to do all the external things and finding a lot of questions that aren't answered and a lot of encouragement and resources that seem empty. They're ending up running empty on doing the external behaviors rather than filling up in the Lord.

I take "working out your salvation with fear and trembling" as obeying from the heart, internalizing this. Paul continues that with "God who's at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure." It's not just the external behavior, but He also aligns our will with His. It's aligned at the heart. When we came to Him, His word is written in our hearts. But in practice, there's still wrestling that the Lord does with each of us and coming to say, "Lord, I trust you with this," even when things are uncertain and aren't the way that I would have liked them to be.

This has been hugely encouraging to me as I've been slowing down and spending time here to realize that the God of the universe is at work in me, in you, both to will and to work for His good pleasure. This is not just doctrine that I can speed through. He Himself is there, and as Allan said, both to will and to work for His good pleasure. That's encouraging because there are times where we definitely don't feel like it. In fact, we'd like to run in the opposite direction and we have some other ideas. To know that at the core, my will is already aligned with Him because the Spirit is there. Now I get to work it out in practice as Allan was saying.

It's not God barking orders and sitting back to judge how we're doing. It's the Lord showing us the word of life, the way to go, and then right there to enable it by the Holy Spirit. I'm sure each of us have said and we've certainly heard many times when people are on the cutting edge of their faith and finding something difficult that the Lord calls us to. And it's easy to pray, "Lord, help me to be willing to do whatever it is." That's a valid prayer, but sometimes it's hedging. It's, I want to give my flesh more time to keep going on the old way because I really think it's right. And to know that the will has already been changed, and so it's more yielding to the work He's already done within and then trusting Him to walk it out in practice. And so I'm not trying to become what I'm not. I'm getting to trust Him to grow into who I am, and that's very enabling.

And we see how kind of silly it is if you've thought of a couple up at the altar getting married, and the pastor says, "so, and so are you willing to take this woman or this man to be your wife or husband?" "Well, I'm praying to will to do it. I'm praying to want to do it." No, you say "I do!" And then you do. And the Lord enables the growth that enables you to walk it out over a long time. So it's actually a very good analogy.

**Learning over Paul's shoulder**

I have enjoyed overviewing the book of Philippians as a whole and have recognized that it is a discipleship letter. The book starts with Paul's confidence in what the Lord is doing in this church and his prayer for them, and then moving into what he's learning through his imprisonment. And then he moves into this dilemma, the cutting edge of his faith with the question of if he is to remain or go and be with the Lord. And you see the Lord working in him both to will and to work for His good pleasure within Paul himself. At first he's saying, to depart and be with the Lord is much more better. But then as he and the Lord interact on it, he comes to realize, "actually, Lord, I think that you want me to remain in order to continue serving and blessing". And it's a hard road, but Christ will be exalted in my body, whether through life or through death. And so Paul is giving this exhortation and is also leading and training by example.

We have this most wonderful resource of the Lord God who's at work in us. And it's this active, continual working. Given that resource, what do we do with it? 

**Why "work out your salvation" and not "work out your sanctification"?**
(Note: salvation and sanctification are two sides of the same process. Salvation is oriented towards the "from": i.e. the specifics of what we are being saved from in practice. Whereas sanctification is oriented towards the "to": i.e. the common goal that all believers are pressing towards. So the emphasis of the command is to work out your own salvation with respect to growing out of your individual sin areas and patterns)

> Why does it not say work out your sanctification with fear and trembling? 

That's a good question. I'm actually not totally sure, but one thing that I have noticed in the text so far is Paul has used the word salvation already in the letter. And when he's used this word, he has been referring primarily to sanctification. In chapter one, verse 19, Paul transitions from looking at what the Lord is already doing to what he anticipates the Lord will do. Verse 18 ends with, "Yes, and I will rejoice. For I know that this will turn out for my salvation through your prayers and the provision of the spirit of Jesus Christ."

A couple of weeks ago, when we talked about, "will turn out for my salvation," because of the rest of the passage, we know that Paul is not saying, "I know that this will turn out for my release from prison". But he's anticipating that the Lord is going to continue growing him through this process, no matter what happens, and in particular that through this process, the Lord becoming more and more visible through him, regardless of how things turn out. We can ask Steve or look it up for another time.

At least in the English, and since salvation in English is used for the beginning of entering into salvation, it's used for the final moment when the Lord has finished it with the twinkling of an eye, and it's used for the middle sanctification process. It's all really part of the same thing all the way through. He's saving me from who I would be naturally and into the fullness of His character. It's really a continuum: beginning, middle, and end. He's not just wanting a technical term. He's underlining that this is a continual process of God saving us from slavery to sin and slavery to the flesh and setting us free into the promised land, the inheritance of His character. And He will complete it. Is that helpful?

That is a wonderful tie-in with the salvation from slavery in Egypt into the promised land, because that's actually the image that Paul is going to use right after this. Just last mention, it says, "Work out your salvation with fear and trembling for it's God who's at work on behalf of His good pleasure." As we respond to Him and grow, we have the opportunity to give the Lord Himself joy. That to me is really motivating. Romans 12:1 and 2 mentions the same thing, that I have the privilege and motivation of getting to give joy to the Lord. It's not just working out, am I going to obey today; it's I'm giving Him joy as I grow. Just like with a parent, there's so much joy as you see your child growing and maturing.

**Grumbling and Disputing... the Israelites in the wilderness**

Verse 14: "Do all things without grumbling or disputing so that you will prove yourselves to be blameless and innocent. Children of God above reproach in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation among whom you appear as lights in the world." Verse 14 can really come as a bit of a surprise. As we focus on what we're doing externally, God's at work in you. For many of us, with our focus on what we're doing externally, we're expecting that it's going to say, "go on mission, do something amazing, serve in some great way!", and that is in view. But where Paul really wants to focus is more on *how* we're doing it rather than on *what* we're doing. It's really the focus on the heart, with the Lord working from the inside.

**Grumbling... "gonguzo"**

> The women's Bible study at PBCC is working through the book of Numbers. That word grumble is everywhere. When I read that, because I was just studying that today and all these things that God does, like the rod of Aaron, so they won't grumble anymore. And here's that word again. I think that God's trying to tell me something. But it's old stuff. Grumbling, clear back when as soon as they got out of Egypt, they started grumbling.

It's an ancient habit of the flesh. We did have fun looking up the Greek word for grumbling. The root is gonguzo. It's where the English word gong comes from. It's speaking in low tones, murmuring. When a gong is sounded, you can't really hear too much else. That's part of the deal with gongs. 

> When I was looking it up, the words that defined it, all I could think of was "this is like children. This is so like adolescence. There's pouting and all of that stuff". It was very convicting. Very immature behavior. 

The flesh is pretty immature. I recognize that my flesh is a complainer and a grumbler. I've learned to recognize it and realize this is not from the Lord. This isn't me. It's something I want to deal with now. Why don't we take some time to actually look at the Exodus and Numbers texts, as well as some passages in the New Testament with grumbling?

**Just how serious is grumbling & complaining?**

I'll start with 1 Corinthians 10:10, and I'll read some of the background and see just how serious the Lord actually thinks grumbling is, because it can seem minor, but it's an entire mindset that really dampens our walk with the Lord.

> 1 Corinthians 10:1 "For I do not want you to be unaware, brethren, that our fathers were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea, and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and all ate the same spiritual food and all drank the same spiritual drink, for they were drinking from a spiritual rock which followed them, and the rock was Christ. Nevertheless, with most of them, God was not well pleased, for they were laid low in the wilderness." 
>
> "Now these things happened as examples for us, so that we would not crave evil things as they also craved. Do not be idolaters, as some of them were. As it is written, the people sat down to eat and drink and stood up to play. Nor let us act immorally, as some of them did, and 23,000 fell in one day. Nor let us try the Lord, as some of them did, and were destroyed by the serpents. Nor grumble, gong guzzo, as some of them did, and were destroyed by the destroyer. Now these things happened to them as an example, and they were written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the ages have come."

Grumbling is one of the key factors that's identified here that prevented this entire generation from entering into the land of promise—entering into the Lord's rest. It's mentioned alongside the idolatry of the golden calf, of the people intermarrying with the foreign peoples, testing of the Lord, and then right after that, grumbling.

To get a clearer picture of this, I found 10 instances of grumbling in Exodus and Numbers. If it actually turns out to be exactly 10, it wouldn't surprise me because that is the number for judgment. Interestingly, after the 10th instance of grumbling, the Lord responds by telling Moses to put a bronze serpent on a pole so that whoever looks at it may be healed and live. So after all of this grumbling, 10 times or more, the Lord's response is a foreshadowing of paying the greatest cost at His own expense to put an end to this ancient habit of humanity. So it is a really big deal to the Lord.

**Examples in Exodus and Numbers**

Let's look at some examples. We'll start with Exodus 14, verse 10. This is after the Egyptians have chased Israel all the way to the Red Sea. They find themselves trapped there with a huge army arrayed against them, their wives, their children—a huge threat. This is the most elite army in the entire world at this point against a bunch of slaves not trained for battle.

In Exodus 14:10, 

> as Pharaoh drew near, the sons of Israel looked and behold, the Egyptians were marching after them, and they became very frightened. The sons of Israel cried out to the Lord. Then they said to Moses, "Is it because there were no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? Why have you dealt with us in this way, bringing us out of Egypt? Is this not the word that we spoke to you in Egypt, saying, leave us alone that we may serve the Egyptians? It would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness."

That's one of my favorite verses. There were not enough graves in Egypt to bring us out here to die. So typical. A lot of their job was building graves, tombs for the pharaohs. They were well acquainted with the graves in Egypt, I suppose. As I'm reading this, the tie with the teenager is very clear. I'm unhappy with what my parents are doing, so I'm going to say something inflammatory, just to provoke a response. It's really a veiled accusation or, in this case, an unveiled accusation of what the provider is doing in the situation. 

> Comment: it says they were afraid and then they started talking like that. That was their way of trying to deal with feeling afraid, which they probably felt embarrassed by.

> Comment: It just takes me back to the garden, let's blame somebody else. The shame and blame thing just goes way back. And it is very immature. And I'm sure there must be a psychological term for that, where we reframe and restate something that's completely inaccurate. Like, "let's go back to Egypt where we had all this stuff", which is completely inaccurate. They didn't have anything. And, you know, what is that about? That to me is a really weird thing. But if you guys know anything about that, I see that happening in my situation with my son and his wife. Reframing to blame and saying things that are just ridiculous because, I don't know.

It's totally human when I'm overwhelmed or afraid and don't know what to do. I can feel like I'm to blame and then I want to shift it really fast to somebody else and I tend to shift it to the other people and then ultimately to the Lord that , "the woman you gave me...".

> Question: Are we saying that the phrase in verse 10, "and the sons of Israel cried out to the Lord," actually means grumbled? 

Not in this particular case. In later passages, the narrator will say that they grumbled at Moses and Aaron, or just Moses, or grumbled at the Lord. But in all of these cases, there's this pattern of what they're saying to Moses and Aaron, which is not being able to view reality accurately. They have a revisionist memory of what Egypt was like. Saying things like: we wish we were back in Egypt because of how evidently good that was. All the leeks and garlics and onions.

> Comment: When I read these passages, it's kind of easy for us with the knowledge of how it ends to look at them and be judgmental. But when I've read them, they're actually encouraging to me that as scared as I might get and therefore not in my right mind, God's still kind to me. He still answers. "Then the Lord said to Moses, why are you crying out to me? Tell the sons of Israel to go forward. As for you, lift up your staff." He doesn't say until they get their heads on straight, I'm not going to talk to you. I just think it's easy for us to be critical. I know that I myself have been in situations like this where I don't remember what it's actually like and I'm complaining or scared.

We all have. That's why 1 Corinthians 10 says, "These things were written for our instruction on whom the ages have come," because we all do this. When we're afraid and overwhelmed, we're trying to deal with it somehow. But God is gracious.

And it's really interesting that in Exodus, I think in every instance of grumbling the Lord does provide for the real need that the Israelites have. The Lord is really showing them who He is, documenting who He is, and saying, "come and get to know Me". But then it's interesting, by the time you get to Numbers, the Lord provides in some instances, but in other instances, He judges with the land swallowing up people or a disease or a plague. And so the Lord is giving this learning period of saying, "get to know who I am in the midst of this". There is the reality of the need, and it is legitimately life-threatening. It's easy, knowing the end of the story, to say "how silly of them", but the Lord is actually very tender in all of these instances, showing the consequences a bit later on as they've gotten a lot of chances to see how He responds.

The next one I found was in chapter 15. After the song of Moses and Israel, after this huge deliverance, and of course, they've already experienced another huge deliverance with the 10 plagues, which at first were on the entire land and then on the Egyptians only, with the Israelites spared. And so they've seen that, they've seen the destruction of this huge army, the most advanced army of its day. Now in Exodus 15:22, 

> Then Moses led Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur. They went three days into the wilderness and found no water. When they came to Marah, they could not drink the waters of Marah, for they were bitter. Therefore, it was named Marah. So the people grumbled at Moses, saying, "What shall we drink?" Then Moses cried out to the Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree, and he threw it into the waters, and the waters became sweet. There He made for them a statute and regulation, and there He tested them. And He said, 'If you will give earnest heed to the voice of the Lord your God, and do what is right in His sight, and give ear to His commandments, and keep all His statutes, I will put none of the diseases on you which I have put on the Egyptians. For I, the Lord, am your healer."
>
> Then they came to Elim, where there were 12 springs of water and 70 date palms, and they camped there beside the waters. 

The Lord does provide, not only with the tree that made the waters sweet, but in an oasis that He leads them to afterwards as well. As you said, Beth, He's so gracious in His abundance. 

> Comment: Studying in Numbers, it's just so evident that point that you're making. As much as they do grumble, God continues to provide for them. Well, he does judge those that are really rebellious. He doesn't necessarily see the grumbling as rebellion, but like when you referenced Korah—being swallowed up by the ground. That was because Korah came and said, "Hey, Moses, what makes you so hot? We're just as good as you." So he was really rebelling, not just grumbling. And boy, God really dealt with all of that.

Studying Numbers has been extremely enlightening to me, a lot of these kinds of issues about grumbling and rebellion and how God deals and God's provision. In any case, even when they grumble, just like if our kid comes in and they forgot their lunch at home, and so they come home after school and they're hungry because they forgot their lunch. And this happened to me a lot with one of my kids. You still feed them, and it was their fault.

Let's jump to Numbers 20:2. Familiar situation. 

> There was no water for the congregation, and they assembled themselves against Moses and Aaron. The people thus contended with Moses and spoke, saying, "If only we had perished when our brothers perished before the Lord. Why then have you brought the Lord's assembly into this wilderness for us and our beasts to die here? Why have you made us come up from Egypt to bring us into this wretched place? It is not a place of grain or figs or vines or pomegranates. Nor is there water to drink."
>
> Then Moses and Aaron came in from the presence of the assembly to the doorway of the tent of meeting and fell on their faces. The glory of the Lord appeared to them. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, "Take the rod and you and your brother Aaron assemble the congregation and speak to the rock before their eyes that it may yield its water. You shall thus bring forth water for them out of the rock, and let the congregation and their beasts drink." So Moses took the rod from before the Lord, just as He had commanded him. And Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly before the rock. And he said to them, "Listen now, you rebels, shall we bring forth water for you out of this rock?" Then Moses lifted up his hand and struck the rock twice with his rod, and water came forth abundantly, and the congregation and their beasts drank.

In addition to the grumbling of the Israelites, we see the contagiousness of this grumbling. Life is hard, but we've seen the Lord over and over again. And in fact, this is basically an identical situation to where we've seen Him already work. Yet the response, as opposed to working out salvation with fear and trembling, is saying, "I haven't learned," even though I've seen the Lord work in this exact situation in my life before.

And with that grumbling, actually, Moses then comes and instead of speaking to the rock as the Lord commands, strikes it twice. The last time he struck the Lord on the rock, and water came forth abundantly. But this time the Lord calls him to speak to it. And in his anger and in his frustration, Moses strikes it.

Grumbling and disputing cause more of it; it multiplies. 

> Comment: I think that's one of the saddest lines in the Bible because Moses did all that, and yet didn't get to take them into the promised land after all these years. I just think that this is really sad.

Yeah, the beautiful thing is, as you look forward into the gospels, he does get into the promised land because he meets Jesus on the Mount of Transfiguration. So it's not the end of the story. He's a leader who is an example, and so the Lord is working like the James passage, "Beware, brethren, lest any of you become teachers because as such you incur a stricter judgment." My example affects so many people that the Lord has to be stronger in response to me because I will influence so many. But he doesn't lose out in the long run.

**Psalm 95**

We saw a handful of examples of how this grumbling and disputing played out. I wanted to turn to another spot in Scripture where the psalmist is doing a theological reflection on what the significance of this persistent habit of grumbling is. It's Psalm 95. The most relevant section of the psalm starts in the second half of verse seven, and it says, 

> Today if you would hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as at Meribah, as in the day of Masa in the wilderness when your fathers tested me. They tried me, though they had seen my work. And for 40 years, I loathed that generation and said, they are a people who err in their heart and they do not know my ways. Therefore, I swore in my anger, truly, they shall not enter into my rest.

The Lord is revealing to us that persistent grumbling is the result of a hardness of heart. "Do not harden your hearts as in Meribah and Massah." As the psalmist continues, he gives a reason for the hardness of heart. That underlying reason is there are people who "err in their hearts and they do not know My ways". The root cause is not having internalized and recounted and relived the impact of all of what the Lord has done in saving them in practice over and over again.

**Knowing the Lord's ways**

So this text has been a wonderful encouragement to me in terms of how do I strengthen myself in the Lord? How do I open my ears and soften my heart to hear Him, to obey? The psalmist's encouragement here is: really to get to know your Lord's ways. This has led to wonderful times of prayer, times of spending time in the Word, and of seeing this in the lives of the Old Testament saints. I've really enjoyed reading Daniel recently, and the life of Joseph, and the life of David as he's really learning things, the life of Abraham, as he's getting to know his Lord. And, of course, seeing the Lord's ways in the lives of the saints around me has also been really encouraging.

Even just this last year, watching Erica's recovery with the shoulder and the various injuries, and how her focus has stayed on what the Lord is doing in the midst of the massive pain. That's been the pattern, and being encouraged by that and seeing all the places the Lord has brought you as you've turned your focus from the pain to "what are You doing, Lord" with me in the hospital here so often, in the PT, wherever it is. It's been encouraging with the bottom line of getting to know the Lord's ways, and a soft heart and obedience flowing forth from that.

This passage has been really helpful, and you can combine it with Hebrews 3 where it's quoted also. But the question, what do I do when I'm afraid or when things are not the way that I would have written them? The scenario is not what I wanted. What do I do? Do I just react, which is the complaint, the fighting, the grumbling, or do I back off to what have I seen the Lord do, which is what you were talking about? It's kind of a working out a heuristic of what do I do when I'm afraid, when I'm overwhelmed.

Psalm 95 starts with, we're the sheep of His pasture and He's our shepherd and all of that. Every single liturgy that we know of stops in the middle of seven. We all like "The Lord is a great God and come, let us worship and bow down. Let us kneel before the Lord, our maker, for He is our God. We are the people of His pasture and the sheep of His hand." Stop. That's where every liturgy stops. Instead of going on, what do we do with that? "Do not harden your hearts today. If you would hear His voice, don't harden your heart" and so on. The first half is let's look at the Lord and how He loves to work. And as I go to Him, even though I'm afraid, overwhelmed, don't know what to do, don't know how to care for those who are in my stewardship care, I'm afraid for them as well. To back off to what do I know of the Lord? Where have I seen Him? Where have others seen Him? And then go to Him asking for His work as Moses did. Moses was the one who would turn to the Lord and ask. And the Lord worked magnificently because of the one, which is encouraging to me that even if everybody else is complaining and fighting, if I go to the Lord with trust, all of us will get to see Him. And that's very encouraging. And it certainly has been true in our lives again and again.

Ask instead of grumble and ask with trust and thanksgiving. And it's Abraham in Romans 4, when he looks at the gap between what the Lord promises and where he and Sarah are. An heir? Not likely. But he says that gap is how much we will get to see the Lord, and he gives praise ahead and lo and behold, the Lord works. And so I'm learning. I don't always go there, but learning when there's a huge gap between seeing the Lord's goodness and where I'm walking at the moment to say, thank you, Lord. I am going to get to see You at work. I don't know what You'll do, but I know You will. And that thanksgiving based on trust really lifts us up.

**"Do I like this?" It's the wrong question!**

And I realized Genesis 3 is really the base of all of this because out of the fall, we end up judging by sight what's good and what's evil. And I realized my tendency is to ask, do I like this? And it's the wrong question. There was the old awful bumper sticker: Are we having fun yet? As if that's the point... It's a terrible bumper sticker. But that's not the point. The point is, I'm in the Lord's service, and as I trust Him and walk with Him instead of saying, "Lord, You blew it in allowing these circumstances, I'm judging Him according to my view of what's good and what's evil". It doesn't mean that I'm wrong in terms—I mean, no water is a serious business—but saying, "Lord, You are here, and You will be at work. So please provide" instead of just "how could You bring me here."

**How do we respond to real challenges?**

I've come to think about that gap and look at my own life, and to be studying "how am I responding to this gap of what I'm longing for, what the Lord promises, and what I seem to be currently experiencing?" And I've come to recognize the thanksgiving and holding fast to what the Lord promises to do while not denying the reality of what I'm currently experiencing. That gap of holding onto both the Lord and not denying the current reality, is the stretching process, the growing in faith.

I've also thought about what are some other ways I've responded that were not growing in faith. There's definitely been the grumbling, which is saying that the only reality is in my current experience, and I am not holding on to what the Lord has said or promised at all. It's just out of the picture. It's not powerful enough. It's not relevant. Whatever it is, discrediting what the Lord has said. Another response is escapism. This is the whole, I am going to the right source of life and I'm in the word, attending Bible studies and whatever it is, but I'm actually just pretending that everything is amazing and not really interacting with the challenges, which is where the Lord really loves to work, where things are difficult and tough. And instead, trying to live in the ivory tower where theoretically everything is good, and I'll just pretend it's so. That's not faith either. Jesus didn't pretend that Gethsemane was fun or where He wanted to be apart from His love for us.

And another response is to say I'll ignore it. That's the dissipation from Ephesians 5. I'm going to consume myself with other things to just fill my senses or attention and forget that these issues even exist. I'm sure we could catalog even more ways of dealing with these challenges and growth opportunities that the Lord gives us. But something that's encouraged me from Psalm 95 is the Lord is bringing us through this curricula in the school of faith in order that we would enter his rest, in order to enter the promised land. And having that in view, of the Lord being our shepherd, walking with us step by step and the promise of getting to know Him more and more—being confident of His leading and guiding us into the fullness of who He is as we are growing into His image—has just been a wonderful perspective. Instead of viewing challenges as a disaster, it's viewing it as another class in the life of faith, and the stakes are higher. The odds seem lower, whatever the case may be. And yet remembering that there is a wonderful prize of getting to know the Lord in the midst of all of this.

**Re: specific expectations**

Just one other quick aspect. This quarter, I've seemed to counsel various people who have huge and very specific expectations. And it doesn't mean not to have expectations, but do I make it this has to happen for life to be good? And I'm angry and disappointed if it doesn't happen. There have been quite a few times where I'm meeting with people who are perfectionists, who drive themselves really hard, but then it gets turned outward on expectations about others and about circumstances. And then it doesn't happen. And it's nonstop complaint, anger, disappointment.

I've realized if I have a lifestyle of lots of specific expectations that are not based on God or His promises, but just what I'd like and what seems right, I am setting myself up for a life of anger and disappointment. Instead of, yes, it's good to dream, but entrust that to the Lord for His working out what is from Him instead of holding on to it and then just being angry, complaining, and constantly disappointed and no joy. It's another angle on this same thing of "why is this so important?"

As you were saying that, it reminded me of the first couple of verses from Proverbs 16: "The plans of heart belong to man, but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. All the ways of a man are clean in his own sight, but the Lord weighs the motives. Commit your works to the Lord, and your plans will be established." It's really an illustration of what you just described.

> Comment: Can I share a perspective here and then you guys can help me? Because everything you're talking about, you know, and they're done that in terms of those struggles and especially the last three years for myself coming to terms with a lot of things that didn't turn out the way I had hoped. And I really have come to peace about that. It wasn't easy.
>
> Now, that tendency to want something to turn out right is now focused on my son and his family. I'm worried about them. As I'm listening to you guys, and Erica, what you said about where is the Lord in this? Where am I trying to join in with what He might be doing? Instead, I'm worrying and trying to think of the things I might be able to say or do. How can I be there for the kids and all that? So I'm still doing it. I'm just not doing it about me. That's even worse because now I'm like, how can I just sit back and enjoy the peace of God when these people that I love so much don't have that? That's an issue that's very present in my life right now.

Paul certainly expresses that, his huge grief and longing for the Jews, his people, his greater family, to come to the Lord and walk with Him. So it isn't that those longings aren't from the Lord. It's just, what do we do with them? I think that's where turning the longings and seeing there's so much more if you would just turn to the Lord and walk with Him and let Him bring healing. Taking that as a major call for prayer, being the Moses who turns to the Lord saying, I know You, I know what You can do. I know that there's not a guarantee because You gave us free will and You honor that, but please be deeply at work and woo them with Your love and help me to be part of that, to just be Your arms, Your legs, and to let them see the goodness of God over your shoulders as you've dealt with hard stuff and learned to walk at peace with your Lord. You can be a forerunner for them and pray that the Lord will bring other people into their lives that they can listen to who aren't mom to show His love to them. Moms have a special way of doing it, but also there's a limit and praying that the Lord will bring others in where they can see the Lord over other people's shoulders.

> Comment: I love that phrase, "to see the Lord over my shoulder" or over somebody's. That's very helpful imagery for me. A lot of what you've just shared is encouraging to me because I have been praying that way. But it still feels like I still have that anxiety. You're watching your kid run off a cliff. But they're not kids. They're adults. 

Thanking the Lord that He's given them free will and that's a gift. But praying... Just pray. You're praying with Him because He longs. We know He longs for them, for all to come to Him and be saved. We know from His word that you are joining the Lord in His heart for your kids. Just keep praying with Him. It's the Romans 8. "When we're weak, we're prayed for by the Spirit and the Son." Amen. You get to groan along with the Spirit and pray. Pray because I don't know what to pray. That's okay. You can pray Scripture. Just pray that the Lord's, you know, who woos, that we know His longing is for them to come. So Lord, keep showing Yourself and woo their hearts. I do see signs when I'm not anxious. His brother-in-law is all of a sudden interested in following the Bible as a way of life. I don't know where he is with the Lord. So there's that.

> Right now, my son and his wife are separated in the house. As a couple, they're not relating. But they're there with their kids, and there's still family life and all of that. My eight-year-old granddaughter signed up for some class, a theater or something, and she doesn't want to do it anymore. Both her parents are saying, no, you have to fulfill your commitment. I'm like, are you hearing yourself? I just see that as a sign of the Lord from the mouths of babes. You know, I don't want to. They're saying, no, you have to keep your commitment. I just had to laugh about that one.

You're picking up on a place where they have a little bit of ears to hear. You can pray that they will see that God is a covenant God who sticks with us. Once we have given ourselves to Him, He sticks with us, no matter how much we're complaining. I am going to pray about that. I get a chance to pray about it for sure. 

> Maybe in the right moment, I could say to my son, "do you realize when you guys were telling her?" and maybe they heard it, maybe they were both there. They were in the same room at the same time saying this thing about keeping a commitment to a child. Maybe they did hear. Maybe they don't need me to tell them. Well, thank you. Thanks for your perspective. 

Allan mentioned Romans 2:1, "that we judge what we ourselves actually are doing." You can use that verse to pray for them, that they will see themselves in the mirror and realize that the Lord is more than any of us, a covenant keeper of love.

In the text, I noticed that Paul actually has a progression of seemingly really challenging exhortations and commands. It starts with the "do nothing from selfish ambition or empty conceit". So he's starting with, in any situation, it's not out of selfishness but out of love for the other. Cora, I see that you're already there. Then it's the "do all things without grumbling and disputing". It doesn't sound like you're grumbling about it. It sounds like you and the Lord have already gotten past that. But then the final one is the "be anxious for nothing". 

> I hear that verse a lot. Really, God brings that verse back. I don't know how to not do that with this situation.

Just as Erica was sharing, I thought it was a wonderful illustration of Philippians 4. "...if there's anything excellent, if anything worthy of praise, dwell on these things." Identifying where the Lord is speaking, is working, and to identify, ponder, dwell on those and join the Lord there.

> Isn't His word amazing? I mean, that's such a personal, practical, you don't know what to do, here's what to do. In this situation, in this time, in your life, it just amazes me. Thank you for reminding me of all of that. That's what I do. 

It's wonderful that the Lord is setting us free all the way through, even in the progression of this one letter, which is actually pretty short.

**Shining as lights in the world**

Back to the Philippians 2:14 and onwards. Just one quick note about the opportunity here, which is to shine as lights in the world, verse 15, "so that you'll prove yourselves to be blameless and innocent children of God above reproach in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation." That "crooked and perverse generation", is Paul continuing on in this Exodus and Numbers reference to the generation that was unable to enter into the Lord's rest, into the promised land. 

The text contrast that with being children of God: those who have the Lord's life within and who are living on that basis, and who hope in the promise of that coming into full maturity. As we do that, we're lights in the world. We live from a different reference point, with a different goal, with a different way of processing life around us. The contrast is huge. We talked a bit about how in Moses's case the grumbling of the people eventually multiplied into Moses himself getting really frustrated. But there's a wonderful encouragement at the end of this passage where Paul has joy even in the face of death. "Even if I'm being poured out as a drink offering," he says, "I rejoice and share my joy with you all. You too, I urge you, rejoice in the same way and share your joy with me."

So Paul's huge encouragement here is, even though grumbling multiplies, joy in the Lord also multiplies. In this case, it is abundant and spills over. It's our opportunity or our pitfall—it really cuts both ways. It's a wonderful invitation to take these situations in life and process it in a different way.

**Holding fast the word of life**

In Psalm 95 as well as in the Hebrews 3 text, the encouragement of a different way to process is to know the Lord's ways. And I think the way that Paul phrases it here is, the beginning of verse 16, it's "holding fast the word of life". There is the threat, the situation that we're going through. "There's no water". "There's no food". But then on the other hand, there's the holding fast to what the Lord has said, what He promises to do. "Holding fast" has an element of perseverance. The Greek lexicon says it means to give attention, to hold out, to hold one's mind towards, to stay. So even in the midst of poor odds and big challenges to say, "Lord, I trust you and I'm holding on to Your promise of life". It's saying, "when You speak, when You move in this situation, it's going to be life". And because my focus is on You, actually, there's no reason to grumble because I'm not asking the question "is this good for me?" But rather, "Lord, how can I join You in this?" And "what are You bringing about through this?"

In Paul's case, again, this is Paul's mentoring us, letting us see over his shoulders what the Lord has shown him. Paul's awareness here is that, as he holds fast the word of life, and as he encourages the church to hold fast the word of life, that in the day of Christ, he will have reason to glory, to boast. And that, his labor in Christ was not empty, was not for nothing, it was not vain. This is a wonderful approach that the Lord is inviting us to.

**"If I am being poured out as a drink offering"—encouraging others, and never in vain!**

It's also been encouraging to me from verse 17, Paul is now returning to this, "even if I'm being poured out as a drink offering". And there's that "if". Paul is uncertain about what's going to happen, just like he was at the end of chapter one, where he says "if I return or if I remain absent". And Paul, over the course of his life, has gone through this over and over again. This time he's learning from his Lord, which is what we looked at last week, and this time the stakes are possible death. He has learned from experience, from knowing the Lord's ways and holding fast the word of life, that the Lord is trustworthy and that the result of this is going to be more life that I get to experience in Him and getting to know Him. And so even in the highest of stakes possible, Paul rejoices and shares that with us. And part of the sharing in joy is that we would learn likewise. And then us sharing it as well is a huge encouragement to those around us who are in the same walk of faith and in the same race.

Verse 17 has been really helpful because it's, I'm pouring my life out to the Lord. I'm doing it for the benefit of those that He has me with, but it's a sacrifice. It's a pouring out to the Lord. And that's not in vain. He will use it. You're sowing seeds of pouring your life out to bless others. We don't know whether those seeds will be taken into the heart and acted on or not. If it's with believers, we know that it will. But when, we don't know. And how much in this life. 

But my pouring my life out in His service to encourage others and in prayer is never in vain. Even if the person that I would really like to reach doesn't respond, or at least as far as I know they haven't or haven't when I'm around, we're always being watched. There are others who are affected. I'm constantly having opportunities on dog walks where people have watched me and then we end up in a conversation and then there's a ministry opportunity. As we share our heart, others are watching, others are joining, others are learning just as Paul was sharing. What he's going through and what his approach is, we're learning from him. My sacrificial pouring out is never in vain. Taking the time to rejoice in what the Lord's doing is important because it's so easy to just have the focus on what isn't there yet. Instead of taking the time to rejoice in "where have I already seen the Lord?" Sharing God stories. 

> Comment: It is a wonderful passage for Thanksgiving. It makes me think of Psalm 95, which you read earlier, Allan, because it just so happened I read that this morning, and it starts out, "Sing to the Lord, rejoice," and it talks all about who the Lord is, and then it goes into His admonition to them, and that's what Erica is saying. Let's remember who He is and start there. 

Start there, dwell there, finish there. Start and end. Beginning, middle, and end.

I've been thinking it's a wonderful Thanksgiving passage just with all the things that we tend to want to grumble about and just thanking the Lord for a wonderful chance to apply it and to recount the ways that we've seen Him this year and to have that build vision for what He may do in these hard situations that we're currently facing. It's been a wonderful meditation for the coming celebrations.

> Oh, Lord, thank you that you show us a much better way than just reacting to circumstances. And just focusing on maybe even godly expectations or ones that are speculated. Since we know you're good, if you're good, you would do things my way. And we end up angry and disappointed and complaining instead. Instead of thanking you and giving you joy and sharing in that joy and being part of your work.
>
> Lord, we ask that every one of us will go back through this passage and really look at where our normal response has been still complaint and disputing with You as well as with others. And instead to give ourselves to walk with You who are above in the midst of the brokenness of this world, including our own brokenness, and getting to turn to You. Be a Moses, be one who prays with expectation of what we know You love to do, though it may not be our timetable. Thank You, Lord. May we walk with You, our God, in thanksgiving and give You joy. In Your name, amen.

