> Lord Jesus, thank you that we can gather together from literally all over the world. And thank you for the gift of modern technology and Allan making it available to us so that we can delve into the riches of your word and be encouraged. Every one of us, wherever you have called us to walk. 
>
> Thank you for each one here so gifted by you, Lord, and so loved by you. Thank you that you who know everything about us, including the things that we don't even know and the things we wish we didn't, that you, knowing everything, you love us, and you promise to complete what you've begun. And you are, and we're so thankful. Thankful. Thank you, Lord, that as you say in Psalm 16, as for the saints who are in the earth, that's all of us, they are the majestic ones in whom is all my delight. The wonders, the majesty even of your character shows more and more.
> as we learn to walk with you and participate in the temple cleaning of our interiors and grow in the joy of getting to bring you to those that around us, including brand new life. Thank you for new grandbabies and births that are healthy births. We're so thankful.
>
> Thank you for this rich passage that has spoken throughout the centuries. Would you please speak to us both for our own lives and also as equipping to help others? Thank you, Lord, in your name. Amen. 

**Introduction: Philippians 3**

Tonight, as you may have seen in the handout, this is a very powerful passage as we're in Philippians 3. And it really addresses the human issue of perfectionism. And it's something that pretty much every Stanford student has walked in. That's how you get to Stanford. But it's true outside as well. It's just what areas of life do we consider important to perfect. And we even had a Stanford student who said, when we made that statement, that almost every student who got here, got here through perfectionism. She told me later, she was thinking, well, not me. And then she came back later and said, oh, actually, it is. It just depends on what area you're talking about.

I'm not the pre-med who's stomping all over everybody else to be the best in the top and get in the top medical school. But I have my areas where I am driven by perfectionism. And she's now in medical school. So, and perfectionists who are amazing professionals, athletes, amazing in their fields, can be total slobs personally. We've seen that too, where we expected, oh, if you're that pristine in the way you dress and in how you approach things, and then we find out, oh, no, they're not at all when it comes to personal life and their stuff. So it just depends on what area is important to you. It doesn't matter what they measure or have come to believe is important to measure.

So perfectionism, the drive to be the best of the best, and it can be useful. It's a useful motivator to excelling, to doing the very best effort. And society and institutions certainly know how to capitalize on that and motivate it. We all like the A's. We all like the recognition. Really, what we like is the worship. We like to be worshiped. We like to be recognized and appreciated, and I think it's a kind of self-focused part of being created in the image of God as we're created to worship the Lord, but we kind of would like to worship ourselves, and we will sacrifice anything for it. And we've had top researchers, top doctors who will sacrifice their marriages, their families, whatever their health, whatever it takes to do the research that will get them the recognition or to be voted favorite best professor in the medical school every year, and they are, but the cost in other parts of their life is enormous.

**What is my motivation?**

I certainly had that in high school. I went to a college prep high school, and they really knew how to capitalize on this. All of us received our grades from the principal in an all-school assembly. If you got straight A's, then you came up and knelt to receive a gold cord around your neck. I was one of five who did. And boy, the motivation, which they use as a noose to keep you, is immense. The motivation not to drop out of that elite club is huge, and it really shows.

Of course, Google, Microsoft, and Nobel Prize winning all know how to motivate this way, and a lot of good work is done through it. But it also becomes an inexorable slave driver, where again, you'll sacrifice anything for it. You're never done, and whole areas of life get ignored. We have Stanford PhD students who've been motivated this way all the way through. They got to a prestigious undergrad through perfectionism and made huge sacrifices. Their culture may say that your worth and your family's worth depend on it.

We've even had a PhD student from a third-world country who was sent here by the government and was told, "You have to get straight A's as a PhD student." The first ever sent, not knowing the competition level. And if you don't, we will never send another student again. So what happened? We tried to minister to the student and set the student free, but the student just sat in his cubicle, just paralyzed with fear. And he wasn't able to get any work done. So it can backfire in the long run.

And PhD students, as they're not taking coursework anymore, don't have the weekly exams where they can get the A. They're on a long-term timetable, and the professor is busy, so they don't get a lot of feedback for a long time. And it's easy to burn out, because if you're going for the A, you're going to be the top, and you're not getting feedback for a long time, the motivation starts to really peter out. And we've had many top, very intelligent PhD students who've burned out, who feel like they've gotten lazy, they can't work anymore. And it's because their mode of motivation doesn't work anymore.

The Lord is inviting them to something far better, which lasts for life. That's what this passage talks about. It can also lead to never feeling good enough because you can always do better. And many Christians feel this way. We've had so many who've told us, "I'm just not good enough." In secret, they're depressed. They've lost hope because they're aware of those again-type issues in their lives. And they prayed and prayed and don't seem to grow very much. It can lead to deep depression and loss of hope.

If I may add, one group of people that a lot of people wouldn't expect to be in this situation are very highly accomplished, highly acclaimed movie actors. Alfred Hitchcock reported that he had this frequent situation. What he did was he hired the best actors to create roles from the script and would do it. He hired them for their expertise. And he was not interested in directing the actors, and the actors weren't used to that. His concern was filming what they did as they managed their expertise. They would come to him really worried because, you know, "How am I doing? You're not telling me." His response was, "I'm a professional. You are a professional. I do my work. You do your work. If I were not happy with your acting, I would tell you." But that was not comforting to them because they were used to getting constant strokes from the directors, also being directed out of their minds instead of being allowed to really play the role. And when they didn't have that, it freaked them out.

**Freed to Grow Under Grace**

Here we're talking about not just standards that society puts up or even good things like excelling academically, being able to really contribute in a company or as a professor, research, etc. But we're talking about the absolutes. We're talking about God's standards, about His word and what leads to life and what leads to death. It's very easy as believers to just keep going with the same approach that we've had in many other areas of our lives.

We've had many believers feel like utter failures. "I have these areas where I've blown it again and again and again. How can I even go to the Lord again on this issue? I'm no kind of Christian. How can I lead this Bible study?" This is just endemic to us as human beings to think basically according to law. That's what Paul is addressing. As we really grasp what he's saying, it actually frees us to really excel better because our focus is not self, but the Lord and progress.

We've seen that with students academically. Once they've really grasped and made this paradigm shift, they've actually been able to do much better in their work. This also deals with, though it's not in this passage, Romans 7, the rebel within every one of us. If my standard is perfect for a particular area like academics, pretty soon my flesh will rebel. That's why, because no one tells me what to do, even me. That's why diets don't work. I set my own diet, and by Friday, I've got to celebrate because I did so well. The flesh is a rebel. I'm created in the image of God to rule, so nobody tells me what to do, and a perfectionistic standard is telling me what to do, so I'm darned if I'm going to do it. In the long run, that's what leads to burnout.

**Joy**

We get to start with the theme of Philippians, which is joy. Paul is inviting us to joy in the new year. Philippians brings this up with the word joy and rejoice many times throughout the letter, far more times in this one letter than in the rest of the New Testament combined. Yet the setting is Paul's in prison. Believers are trying to wind up him and getting notches on their Bible by sharing with more unbelievers. Epaphroditus has almost died, and the Lord brought him back. There's dissension in the body. The circumstances are not pretty. And yet Paul has learned the secret of joy in the midst of broken life. And each time it comes up, it's for a different reason.

That's a teaser for you to go through Philippians and look for the word joy and rejoice and see if you can figure out what the focus is. What does Paul say I can have joy or rejoice in? This one is another on of those, starts with one of those passages. He will say, it's a safeguard to us. Rather than just spouting, we're encouraging you as we go through this passage to try to figure out what's the basis of joy here that Paul is talking about, and why is it a safeguard? You can kind of puzzle on that one.

**Philippians 3:1**

Philippians 3, which we'll cover tonight and a week from tonight, begins, "Furthermore, my brothers," most translations say "finally." My brothers, the term here is a term with very broad usage, literally for the rest. It can be for the rest of the time, for the rest of the points that are important to what we're talking about, so forth and so on. So I finally settled on "furthermore" in our translation, which is really resuming from chapter 2:18.

**Reviewing the end of Philippians 2**

If you recall, after talking about the example of Christ's love, in Philippians 2:12, "So then, my beloved, just as you've always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who is at work in you." 

Working on both ends, God is working on His end in us, both to will and to work for His good pleasure. Then we, relying on that resource and that working of God by the Spirit, are to work out our salvation, to apply the will of God within us at our heart and the power of God to work in regard to the various specific areas.

We are saved in terms of eternal ultimate salvation. Our destiny after this life is over is secure. That's true of anyone who's put his trust in Jesus for real life. But now working out your salvation, addressing specific issues where we come to realize that the lifestyle that I'm living is not godly, and we've learned what the godly alternative that's infinitely better is. So we are to work out that process of laying aside the old and taking up the new.

He continues, in Philippians 2:14, "Do all things without grumbling or disputing that you may prove yourselves to be blameless and innocent. Children of God, above reproach in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you appear as lights in the world, holding fast the word of life so that in the day of Christ, I may have cause to glory because I did not run in vain or toil in vain. But even as I'm being poured out as a drink offering on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice and share my joy with you all and you too. I urge you rejoice in the same way and share your joy with me."

He then mentions the two examples, Timothy, whom he's hoping to send sometime soon, and Epaphroditus, whom he has sent bearing this letter that we call the letter to the Philippians. Continuing on from what he was talking about before he mentioned the two emissaries, "Furthermore, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same thing to you again is not worrisome, but a safeguard for you." He has just said, "I rejoice and share my joy with you. You totoo rejoice with me." Then he talks about the one he hopes to send soon and the one he's already sent and comes back then to his topic. "Furthermore, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you again is not worrisome, but a safeguard for you."

We'll see in the context that follows why it's a safeguard. What can we rejoice in, even in the midst of difficult, broken circumstances? 

Philippians 3:2 "Beware of the dogs. Beware of the evil workers. Beware of the mutilation. For we are the circumcision, that is the true circumcision, the ones worshiping in the spirit of God, boasting in Christ Jesus, and having put no confidence in the flesh. Although I am one having basis for confidence in the flesh, If anyone else seems to put confidence in the flesh, I more so. Having received circumcision on the eighth day from the race of Israel, the tribe of Benjamin, the Hebrew of Hebrews, with regard to law, a Pharisee, with regard to zeal, persecuting the church, with regard to the righteousness in law, being found blameless. But whatever was gained to me, these things I've considered loss on account of Christ."

**Philippians 3:2**

"Beware of the dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the mutilation." What's he talking about? Dogs was definitely a derogatory term at that time. Dogs were not household pets. There were many wild dogs. They were the garbage dump scavengers and nasty wild beasts and as such they were used as guard dogs, not pets. 

When we were teaching in Romania and we were warned "don't go outside at night because we've loosed our guard dogs and they'll eat they'll they'll tear you to pieces". And they were not pets at all. They were big, vicious dogs that they came to get their food in the morning. And while they were eating the food that they needed that was offered to them, they were clipped to their chains for the day. Otherwise, it would not be safe to go into that space.

So dogs were a derisive term that was used in the ancient world in general, but the Jews used it especially of Gentiles. And here, Paul is using conscious irony, really turning it on its head with a strong warning. He's not particularly politically correct here, slamming a particular group, but there's a real reason for it.

These were Jewish Christians who were zealous that in order for anyone Gentile to actually be welcomed into the community of faith as a full Christian, they needed to follow the entire law, including especially circumcision. And so they hounded Paul wherever he went. They went to all the new communities of Gentile believers who were growing in their faith and we're causing no end of trouble and doubt. "Am I actually a believer? I'm not circumcised as a male. I'm not following all of the Jewish laws, and especially those that have been added to the Torah, the five books of Moses."

And so they were causing enormous doubt and problems in the new church throughout the Gentile world. And they pursued Paul. And so he's saying, beware, because they're trying to draw you back into a law-based approach that does not focus, and he'll be saying, it focuses you on yourself and your performance, not on the Lord. And it will backfire.

And so he's very strong about this because of their destructive impact. So the point of verse two is, beware of the false circumcision. Beware of the false circumcision is speaking of those who are Jewish therefore who have been circumcised; but it's a circumcision not of the heart but of the flesh. It's pride. "I've got this. You don't. I'm in. You're not." And it's so divisive.

So it's Jewish people who are saying to become a Christian, you have to follow all these laws. You have to become Jewish in order to become Christian. That was the big issue in the so-called Jerusalem Council in Acts 15. The reason I say so-called is it technically is not regarded as a church council. But anyway, it was the debate and conclusion drawn by the elders in Jerusalem who were called upon to address the question of what of the things that are required of practicing Jews are necessary to retain as Christians.

And they came back with three things.

Don't eat meat sacrificed to idols. And as Paul makes very clear in various places, it has nothing to do with the meat. It has to do with participating in pagan practices. So the issue is identification with ungodly religious practices. These practices were supposed to have spiritual benefit, religious benefit from that which is not directed to the Lord at all. 

Abstain from fornication, from all sorts of sexual immorality and consuming blood. And that again: a pagan practice. It's not that there's anything wrong with blood, it's actually quite nutritious. But again it was a pagan practice in trying to acquire the attributes of a powerful bull or the like; to sacrifice a bull and drink the blood. They would also sacrifice the bull over a grate with people standing underneath to be bathed in the blood as it spilled with the idea that there was spiritual benefit resulting from this.

So basically, what they said is the only things that matter is the ungodly pagan practices. And so then he says, "beware of the mutilation". I translate here the mutilation because that reflects what Paul is saying.

"False circumcision" is a perfectly good translation, but it's translating it according to the implications, not according to what Paul literally says. Circumcision in our English term is exactly from the Greek term circumcision. Cutting around, peritome.

And the mutilation, he changes it from being cut around to being cut off. Paul says in one of his letters "I wish the the Judiaizers who were going around telling people that they have to have their foreskins cut off, I wish they'd cut themselves off" just because of the destruction they were causing.

In the modern day perhaps it would be religious types within the Christian tradition who are saying you have to do all these religious rites or else you're not you're not going to be accepted into heaven. 

Note: the reference is Acts 15:29 is that what he said about cutting off well that you abstain from things sacrificed from blood and from things strangled and from fornication. Because the Lord says sacrifice needs to be done by shedding of blood.

Paul says we are the circumcision. And what is the point of circumcision? It's not the removal of a piece of bodily tissue. It's what it symbolizes: cutting off the flesh. And it's a symbol associated with sexual intercourse, reproduction. So it's a sign and at a point where it's important that one is acting in a way that glorifies the Lord. And actually it's a good thing: "hey wait a minute what's wrong with you why aren't you normal?" "Well because I worship the true God". "Oh really! What does he say about what you're doing now coming in to me?" "Well, oh, I forgot. I have an appointment somewhere else. Excuse me. I'm out of here."

Anyway... the symbol is cutting off that of my life, not physical, but cutting off that of my life
which does not glorify the Lord. And the main point, again, is just following religious observance without changing the heart. And you can do all those things without it affecting how you live at all.

And I'm not at all picking on Catholics, I'm just using it as an example. There's a wonderful Catholic community at Stanford and we're friends with a bunch of the priests and a lot of them are genuine believers, there's no question about it. But I see the students coming for communion during our class and many of them seem to come just for the required 20 minutes to get their holiness checked off for the week. Attending 20 minutes of the Mass gives you enough grace for the week, and then they're out of there. And you wonder, is this just ticking off a religious box? Or does it actually mean anything? Does it change them? Is it an expression of a genuine relationship with Jesus, or is it just I'"m trying to be good" and being able to tick off that box (like I did when I grew up in the episcopal church before I came to the Lord). It's easy to do things that are measurable and things that I can easily do without it changing me, and taking pride in it and security in it. So the issue is whether I'm pursuing the reality, or only the symbolic expression of it.

**Philippians 3:3** 

"We are the ones worshiping in the spirit of God..." So there's the contrast with the flesh, the whole question of circumcision. Boasting in Christ Jesus, putting no confidence in the flesh. Where is my confidence? Where do I look for true life? Not in what I can do.

Remember, Paul uses the flesh to refer to everything about a human being other than the Spirit of God. And so someone who does not have the Spirit, someone who has not given their life to Jesus, has all of the flesh and only the flesh to rely on.

But once we have the Spirit, we have the choice. "Do I continue to rely on my natural strengths and abilities and talents and so forth? Or do I put my confidence in the new resource that I have by the spirit of God within me to reproduce the life of God in me, within this body?"

**Philippians 3:4-6**

So Paul says, if anyone seems to put confidence in the flesh, I more so. I was circumcised on the eighth day, in accordance with the requirement from the race of Israel. I was born an Israelite. I was marked for life as an Israelite, as a child of Abraham. On the eighth day, as prescribed in Scripture, the tribe of Benjamin.

In the divided kingdom, Benjamin was the only tribe that remained loyal to Judah and so became part of the southern kingdom. Actually, Simeon got absorbed in there, too. But little Benjamin, there's the smallest of the tribes and had the smallest territory, but was the most fiercely loyal to the true throne, the throne of Judah after the rebellion of the 11 other tribes.

And continuing on, Paul says I am "a Hebrew of Hebrews". Now, the reference here is to language. Most of the people, most Jews in Paul's day, spoke Aramaic, which is a dialect of Hebrew, broader than the pure Hebrew, biblical Hebrew. And then there was all the Hellenizing influence. Most of the scripture, what we call the Old Testament, the Hebrew Bible, was being read not in Hebrew but in the Greek translation, the Septuagint. But Paul's a Hebrew of Hebrews. Hebrew is the primary language that was spoken in his home. That's the language he learned from his parents in a Gentile city where Greek would have been the normal language in Tarsus.

"In regard to the Law, a Pharisee". The Pharisees were the self-appointed police keepers, the vigilante community for the law. They were scholars of Old Testament law, of Torah, the five books of Moses. They specialized in Jewish religious law and were lay leaders rather than from the aristocratic priestly class. They really perfected, literally, the application of every nuance of Torah and the Old Testament to daily life. So they had the most influence on the masses within Israel, enormous influence. After the Romans wiped out Jerusalem and took over in 70 AD and wiped out the temple, the Pharisaical group continued. They really carried Judaism forward to modern Judaism. The priests were wiped out with the temple, but the Pharisees, were the ones who continued to be a major force throughout the centuries, defining Judaism as they were scattered all over the world. But here in this time, they were the religious police. They felt that if all of Israel for one Sabbath kept the law and kept Sabbath, Messiah would come.

They persecuted Jesus because he was not keeping the Sabbath the way that they thought, but he was keeping Messiah from coming. So they were running around on the Sabbath saying, "Oh, I see you left the needle in your robe while you were mending it, and so you're carrying a burden on the Sabbath. You're keeping the Messiah from coming." So that was the kind of thing.

Now, actually, a very cute thing came out last night in class. We were taught a cute little children's song as a result of discussing this verse. Because I mentioned, you know, the difference between a mnemonic to remember the difference between the Pharisees and the Sadducees. The Sadducees don't believe in life after death. That is why they're "sad, you see". And the Pharisees are the self-appointed policemen of the law. And they run around saying, "That's not fair, you see." So anyway, we won't sing the little song. It's cute. Allan can sing it for you. It really was cute.

"With regard to zeal, persecuting the church. With regard to the righteousness in the law found blameless". Not meaning his performance was perfect, but he did what the law required whenever he realized that he had not done exactly what God says. I don't know how the Pharisees had any time to carry on the needs of life. They were all supposed to raise their own food and cook and clean and everything else. I mean, if there's a busy... They were tithing their spices.  You know, you take every leaf of mint and you got to sort them according to different sizes ones, because you got to take one in 10 of the medium-sized ones and one in 10 of the small size one or one in 10 of the big ones, or maybe you're not giving a full tenth. Of course, you could give a fifth and not bother with all the counting. But hey, I'm not going to do any more than I have to. And that's what the law does. I'll do what I have to, but no more. Anyway. And ignoring justice and caring, honoring parents and so on. Yeah, Jesus called them on that.

**Philippians 3:7-8**

So he says, "but whatever was gained to me, those things I've considered loss on account of Christ". And so the picture we get here: Paul was the best of the best in his world. He had the best pedigree. He had the best ethnic background, best language, best academic training. He was trained by Gamaliel, one of the top scholars of the time. It shows in all of his writing and ability to address people. Even when he's presenting his case before Herod Agrippa, fasted and saying, "I know you know the law," and almost convinces him to come to the Lord. And in another instance the Roman governor cries out, "Paul, your great learning is driving you mad!" He recognizes the ultimate scholar in Paul. So he was the top of the top in every bit of his world. But now he's saying, having come to Christ, he counts it as loss. Well, does that mean it's of no value?

He says, "I consider everything to be loss on account of the surpassing gain of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord, on account of whom I sever loss of all things and consider them dung in order that I may gain Christ". Now we gloss in there "of the firsthand experiential knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord", because that's what this particular word for knowledge refers to. It's actually the most rudimentary form of knowledge. There are three terms with three different implications. And this is incipient. This is how a little child learns. This is the basis of scientific research. You learn by firsthand acquaintance, firsthand interaction. And then there's knowledge that comes from revelation. And then there's also truly confirmed knowledge, which actually is this term here, knowledge gained by revelation. Experience, carried to the extreme, really developed and carried forth in its full implications. And that term, which will often be translated in the New Testament, "the true knowledge of Christ" and so forth (which is not what it says here) but that's when we really get to know. It is when we live it out and we have confirmed it in practice, and now we really know.

So anyway, "on account of the surpassing gain of the firsthand experiential knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord". This is not knowing *about*. This is getting to know a person, the person of God himself in Christ, Jesus, my Lord. Now, people commonly assume, quite naturally, that Jesus Christ is his name, just like Steve Lawry is my name, that Jesus is his first name and Christ is his family name. His parents were Joseph Christ and Mary Christ, and so now they have the baby Jesus Christ. 

Christ is a title. And so is Lord. Jesus is a personal name. And it picks up the three aspects of the incarnation. The Christ, which is the Greek counterpart to Messiah, Mashiach, the anointed one. And so he is the one anointed of God that is set apart and commissioned to bring the good news of salvation to the world; and moreover, make it possible judicially. And so Christ is his relationship to God the Father. Jesus is his relationship to people in general, personal, human contact. And Lord is his relationship to those who choose to submit to his recognized authority so that they can have their lives remade into what God intends for human life. He created us in his image, which gives us the potential and also declares the standard by which God assesses how we're doing. And an image, of course, is a representation. How are we doing at representing the true God? And that's why we need Jesus to come to save us, because we don't naturally do a good job of our role. We do a terrible job. And so the Lord is his relationship to those who have responded to the good news of the offer of salvation from the tragedy of the natural life into the wonder of the new life that God offers.

So getting to know Jesus Christ my Lord, getting to know him in all three of those aspects, getting to know him as God's divine ambassador, getting to know him personally as Jesus, the member of the Godhead who has lived a human life and who saves. Who saves. Well, that's right. Jesus is Hebrew, Yeshua, which means the Lord saves. And Lord, we get to know him in all of those aspects. And he says, nothing compares with it.

So first of all, he says, "I consider everything to be the loss on account of the surpassing greatness of really getting to know Christ Jesus my Lord". But then he says, "on account of whom I suffer the loss of all things". Paul doesn't consider them of any worth in comparison. It doesn't mean they don't have any intrinsic worth, but in comparison, of no worth. But now he says, "I suffer the loss of all things". He's saying, "I have all things taken away from me". He's lost his freedom. He's lost his possessions. He's lost many things. And that is suffering because of the persecution because of the gospel. 

**Philippians 3:8-11**

But he also says, "I consider them dung". Now, I translate literally there because Paul is not being obscene. He is making a point. There are two things about Paul's writing. If Paul appears to have made an error in grammar, he's not making a mistake. He's making a point. And probably the classic example of it is in Romans 8, where it says that "although the body is dead because of sin, the Spirit is life because of righteousness". Most translations will say, "Oh, that's faulty parallelism. You need to conform the adjectives and you need to say, although the body is dead because of sin, the Spirit is alive because of righteousness." Well, the spirit is alive, but that's not the point. The point is the spirit is the life that the body that is dead in sin lacks. It's a mortal body. It's a body that is living but is capable of dying and it's a body which actually is living physically but is dead spiritually because it does not have the life of God in it. It has life in the image of God but it doesn't have the life that that image is to represent doesn't have the life itself. And so now here is the other thing. When Paul seems to be making a statement that's uncomfortable, socially uncomfortable. And actually, you know, there's, I didn't mention all the symbolism that we're aware of with circumcision because it gets too graphic. But in things that people have difficulty discussing, and it's okay, it's understandable. It's even appropriate to be circumspect. But... Circumspect. Circumspect, yes. Yes, yes. Circumcision, circumspection, yes. Okay, thank you. Thank you for the inspection of my terminology under the circumstances. Okay.

The reason he says, "I consider them dung," most translations will say something like rubbish, which is perfectly legitimate, but it doesn't convey the strength. It's the idea, but it doesn't really convey the strength of what Paul is saying. What is dung? Dung is that which was taken in because it was seen as being valuable for life, but after all of the life that it was able to contribute has been extracted from it, this is what's left. And so it simply needs to be disposed of.

And that's what Paul's saying, is all these things were things that I took into my life because I was convinced they were really important for having real life. And I went all out. I got everything I could out of them. And guess what? It wasn't enough. And I was just left with that which can't contribute to life at all. So I'm dumping it. And so anyway, in order that I may gain Christ, not just consider it useless, but get rid of it. And that I may be found in him, not having as my righteousness that which is derived from law, but that which is from Christ through faith.

**Judicial righteousness and practical righteousness**

The righteousness from God upon the basis of faith. Two things: judicial righteousness, acceptance before God. And Paul in Romans 4 takes us back to Abraham, the father of the faithful. And he points out very carefully that God pronounced Abraham righteous, that is rightly related to God, because he trusted God. And he points out that that happened before Abraham was given the sign of circumcision. That circumcision was not what made him righteous. He was already righteous when God announced circumcision as a sign of the righteousness that comes from faith, from faith alone.

Righteousness is rightly said that that has to do with being rightly related to God. What is it to be rightly related to God? Well, we're created in his image, which means that we have been created to be representations, and a representation is only as good as it is an accurate representation and to the degree that it represents what it is an image of, what it is a picture, and particularly a living image in this case, a living picture of who the true God is.

And it is righteousness is how we fulfill our potential as being created in the image of God. God has created us to represent him. And with the possibility for people to look at us and say, "Oh, I see what God is like when I look at you. When I look at you individually, when I look at you in relation with others, I'm seeing insight into God." And so righteousness is coming into the full realization and practice of the potential of being created to represent God. So it includes his beautiful character: every aspect of it.

Student: Could you say that righteousness definition again? Yes, it's coming into the fulfillment of the potential to represent God, which is ours as we are created in His image. And so actually, when we look at it that way, righteousness is kind of a no-brainer. Of course, we're expected to be righteous. Of course, we are expected to act according to and grow to become what God's created us to be. But creating us in his image is the beginning. It gives us the potential. We have to develop that just as every baby has to learn how to live as a human being.

And so it's both judicial now and it's also an issue of character. It's practical. So I'm now in right relationship with God. And so I'm aligned with him judicially now, but I'm also aligned with him in character. And it's not out of law. It's not trying to be good enough. It's not, "Oh, I think I'm going to get into heaven because I've been good enough." It's because of what Jesus did on the cross.

And then filled with the Holy Spirit, so we now have his beautiful character within at the core, but we now have a lifetime to grow into it in practice because we have all the inertia and the history of the old. So the flesh is still there, still active, still wanting to take the uppermost. But we learn to trust the Lord to grow into who now you now are at the core, and you get that. We studied Ephesians together, Ephesians 4:24 says, "Put on the new self, which in the likeness of God has been created in righteousness and holiness of the truth."

So He's put His beautiful character. It's a reflection of Him within us. And the fruit of it is the fruit of the Spirit: love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-restraint. I much prefer self-restraint, self-control. And I like thinking of it as being under the control of the Spirit. But self-control seems what we need to control is the flesh. And the flesh is not who I am anymore. So I restrain myself from letting the flesh express itself through me. I'm more comfortable with that than the self-control. But anyway, it gets the idea through anyway.

And people strive after fulfillment. I mean, what's life all about if it's not attaining true fulfillment? And what is true fulfillment? It's living righteously. It's living in a way that truly expresses the life of the true God, which is what we're created to do. And so living righteously fulfills our created purpose and potential and by definition has to be what fulfillment is all about. Yeah, in Ephesians 3:19, "To know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled up to all the fullness of God." And that's, you know, I've got it at the core. But now I get to be filled up every nook and cranny of my being. Being filled up to all the fullness of God isn't fulfillment. What is?

Okay. So it's the righteousness of God upon the basis of faith. Now a person becomes righteous the moment they put their trust in Jesus, righteous in relationship to God. But then you become righteous in relationship to his world. And including especially the people in it, but also the management of the physical creation and caring for the animals.

So the fulfillment, living out the righteousness by relating to and managing the creation and caring for the living beings, and relating to our fellow human beings, fellow creatures created in the image of God, the way God does, and allowing God to relate to them through us. And all of that is the result of faith. The only way I can do that is to trust in God to do it.

**Faith is trust**

And that's faith is trust. Many people will say, "Oh, I wish I had the faith you have." Well, you can. It's are you looking at the one you're trusting, not looking at yourself and trying to generate faith or just waiting till somehow I get a train load of faith from heaven, but instead look at the one that you are trusting. Is he trustworthy? Yes, he is. And the more I trust him, the more I entrust him to work as he says he will work, the more I grow. He promises to complete what he's begun. Philippians 1:6.

The widespread misconception of what faith is, is that it's confident, wishful thinking. That I can see that something is wonderful and therefore I believe it's true, because if it actually were true, that would be wonderful. Well, that's okay as far as it goes. But faith is trusting in that which is utterly reliable. And is wonderful. But also is wonderful not only in its essence but also in what it offers to those who will act on the reality of what it is, which you have to believe that it's reliable, that if you act on it, it will come through.

So anyway, all right. And this, he says, we arrive at this from coming to know him. So we talked about the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord. So from coming to know him brings us back to that and the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of his sufferings. And we'll go back through this again. "Being conformed to his death in order that by whatever means I may arrive at the resurrection from the dead."

**Attaining to the resurrection, new life out of death, today**

Now, this is not talking about hoping that somehow I'm actually going to be admitted when I arrive at the pearly gates after I die. And we've had believers really rocked and questioning that, even on their deathbed. But if I am righteous, and righteous because I have put my trust in God, and specifically Jesus, a member of the Godhead, for true life, I am righteous. So on what basis would I be turned away at the pearly gates? None.

So this is not talking about that, about the power of his resurrection and arriving at the resurrection from the dead. He's talking about his own life in practice. Knowing the power of his resurrection. That is life out of death. The fellowship of his sufferings. He is, of course, including sufferings as he has by persecution. But it's also, it's the sufferings from sin. It's suffering of the result of my own sin. From the activity of the flesh within me. The suffering conformed to his death, raised from the dead.

He's talking now, and he's talking about the power of his resurrection, of rising in practice from the living death of sinning in practice to the true life of intimacy with Jesus by living righteously, as he did and demonstrated in his life on earth. This is talking about God's transforming work in the life of the believer. And coming to know that process and dynamic as I work out my salvation with fear and trembling, confident that it is God at work in me, both to will and to work for his good pleasure.

So this is where we're going to stop this week. But this is a radical paradigm shift from where we tend to live. We tend to revert so easily, as we said, to just, "I've got to try harder. I've got to be able to do it. I'm not very good. I'm feeling bad about myself because I blew it again." And where's the whole focus? Self. And my my performance even two seconds ago, what I was thinking about.

And here it's a paradigm shift. My focus is the Lord himself and the process of growing. I get to know the Lord, through his words, through other mature believers, seeing them, how they deal with situations where they're walking according to the Spirit. And recognizing, "yep, I've got an area to grow". But as I renounce that old approach, which is joining in the sufferings, then I get to experience firsthand the power of his resurrection as he grows me bit by bit. Each day is a day that I can wake up with purpose, with joy of being able to know the Lord better today, both through His word and Spirit and through His transforming me
with my participation. 

As Steve started with the Philippians 2, "working out my salvation with fear and trembling". I'm going for it. Paul is zealous. You notice his zeal shows up again and again and again in this passage. He's going for it. He's not saying, "I'm going to get to heaven so I can just cruise and sit under the banyan tree and enjoy just hanging out". Instead, he's going for it with everything he's got. And he's getting to know his Lord firsthand. He is getting to know the power of the resurrection as he goes through a broken world. And with the circumstances from outside, the things that he encounters on the inside, grumbling and disputing, he realizes, "ooh, that's part of the old, Lord, let's deal with that. I renounce that as a way of dealing with things. I'm just being passive and reacting." And the focus is me and "do I like this?"

Instead, I'm giving myself to grow and to experience the Lord's resurrecting power. I'm thankful for getting to be His and be with Him in these circumstances and learning how to show Him forth, getting to bless others. And there's a tremendous joy in that. And you can just keep the momentum going. There's a lifetime worth of progress. You won't run out. I won't run out. But we get to show him forth more and more clearly.

And it really becomes a joyful adventure with him in the midst of the dailiness of life. I just had that today. I had a pulmonary function test because I had pneumonia this summer on a pretty severe level and pleural effusion liquid on the lungs and heart before that last year. It turned out the gal who was doing it was a believer who needed some encouragement. And we had a fabulous time in the midst of doing all the tests. And I got to encourage her and she recognized the spirit and immediately showed me her well-worn Bible and was looking for some encouragement. And it was just fantastic. Whether the test is helpful or not, it was definitely God's plan that I do it. And it's just an adventure.

You get to bring the Lord's presence of character wherever you go. And he opens up unlooked for opportunities again and again and again. So it turns a daily life into joy. We'll go on to more of it because what we get into next week is really key for dealing with perfectionism. But there's much to grow on here.

Let's pray.
> Lord, thank you that you invite us to much more than just trying to be good. Thank you that you have come yourself into a dark and broken world. You entered left the realm of joy and gladness and privilege and goodness to enter this dark and broken world with all of its enormous needs and heartaches. Thank you for becoming one of us. Thank you for opening, showing us the way, telling us the way, opening the way for us to be yours.
> 
> Lord, may we live that way, no longer just trying to be good enough and so disappointed and even hiding out when we've blown it again, but instead to get to have our focus on you and growing into the beautiful character you've poured into us. And thank you that you promised to complete what you've begun and you are doing.
> 
> Lord, we know each of these ones here, these dear ones of yours, and we know and see how each one has grown so much in the time that we've known them. Lord, you are awesome in your love and in your transforming power. Lord, give us all joy in getting our eyes off ourself and onto you and moving forward with what you died to give us and poured out your life into us to grow into. May we bless those around us with your beautiful character in your name.
> 
> Amen.