> Let's pray. We've got wonderful passages to be in, as always, and encouraging.
>
> Oh, Lord, we are thankful to be yours and thankful that no matter what goes on in the world or in this nation, You are King of Kings and Lord of Lords. You are the rock on which our lives are founded, and thank You that You are deeply at work. No matter who's on top and no matter who's been elected at all the different levels, thank You that You have answered so many prayers and thank You that it looks like there will not be violence. We're so thankful, as that was a very real concern and prayer request.
>
> We're so thankful, Lord, for Your work on national and international levels as well as deeply in our individual lives. And we ask, Lord God, that as You call us to pray for those in government, You will continue to lead a peaceful and orderly transfer of power. Thank You for the wisdom of our founding fathers to set up the system of checks and balances. And Lord, we ask for Your continued grace, even though we as a nation have gone far from You and Your values. We ask that You will bring many to You and cause those in office at whatever level to seek You and to promote Your values, which are healthy for all people.
> 
> Lord, we're so thankful for each one here. 
> 
> Thank You, Lord, for this time together. Speak to each of us in Your name. Amen.

**Introduction: our inexhaustible source of life**
Last week we mentioned, and then barely got to it, that we would be getting to what I think of as the apex of Philippians, the gold mine from which we draw our lives together. Jesus said in chapter 4 of John, talking to the woman of the well, "The one who is thirsty, come to me. And the one who drinks from the living water that I shall give will be drinking from an inexhaustible well of living water." And this passage really starts with that inexhaustible well.

In John 7, at the end of one of the great festivals, when they poured out water as part of their thanksgiving to the Lord in Jerusalem, Jesus said, "If anyone is thirsty, let him come to Me and drink. He who believes in Me, as the Scripture said, 'From his innermost being will flow rivers of living water.'" We are starting in the beginning of chapter two of Philippians. This first verse is a well of living water for us as we're in the midst of the challenges of life, especially with long-term relationships, whether it's marriage, family, church fellowships, or the workplace. Wherever people are, there are challenges, including where we are. This verse is our inexhaustible well to fill up with so that we have much to give with the Lord. This living water flows into a radical lifestyle that is totally different from what our culture now pushes and lauds. Our culture pushes and lauds the self-promoting lifestyle. We certainly see that with students and with recent graduates out in the big tech companies. Within these companies, people are climbing all over each other to be the top and the best.

There is also so much competition within study programs. Anybody mentions pre-med and immediately you're imagining climbing all over each other to get into the top schools. We keep getting reports of abusive managers who are just trying to use their staff for their own aggrandizement, and the way they're treating them really is abusive. Not just the demands, but the manner in which they talk to them. It's really sad.

What we're looking at tonight is radically different from that, where the living waters flow out, and it's rivers of living water, not just a trickle. This brings back Exodus, where God stood on the rock and told Moses to strike it with his staff, and a river, a raging torrent enough to feed millions and their animals, came forth. We're told in 1 Corinthians 10, "The rock was Christ," and it followed them through the wilderness. We've been in the Dead Sea wilderness, and it was 113 degrees. It was a moonscape, and it was that type of wilderness they were in for 40 years. This river of living water followed them and was available to them. That's what we have getting to flow up into us as we learn to feed more and more on the Lord Himself and His word.

We hiked up along the defile of Wadi. It was fascinating. En Gedi is the spring of the goats, and we walked up this place. The guide said, "How many goats do you see?" Most people said, "I don't see any goats." "Yeah, take a very close look at these rock walls." "Oh, I see one. I see three, eight, 22." They freeze and blend in with the rock so beautifully.

We hiked up to En Gedi, the spring of the goats. There's a marvelous shelf of rock with water pouring over it—a beautiful waterfall in the midst of a moonscape. It was hot enough that we all just went and stood under it without taking our packs off or anything, just fully dressed and came out drenched, and started down the trail. A hundred yards down the trail, we were bone dry. But the picture of that waterfall bursting forth from a rock remains in our minds. There's a beautiful image of this in the midst of a moonscape where there's nothing that could promote life. That river of living water is there to fill us up so we have much to give.

That's what we'll be looking at. And that's right on the edge of the Dead Sea, the terminus of the Jordan. It's the lowest spot on the surface of the Earth. The Jordan, the descending river, ends in death. Very illustrative of the reality of natural life in this fallen world. But God. 

And you get all the residue there that the salinity is so high. We've gone swimming in it where you can float on your back with half your body out of the water. Then you get out, and you're covered with salt. That's what's left after all the evaporation. Again, very illustrative. The life is gone. This is the residue. That's what people's lives wind up at if they don't learn to cross at right angles to that flow to enter into the promised land. Beautiful picture of what the Lord is doing in our lives.

We've been exhorted to live our lives as citizens of the kingdom of Heaven, worthy of the good news of Christ. One of you was asking about where the concept of "citizen" comes in. It's often not mentioned in many translations, but the term "worthy" is tied with the concept of citizenship. The Greek term that we make very generic by saying worthy is the term to live appropriately as a citizen. And of course, Paul does reference the kingdom of Heaven as being where our citizenship is in "3:20."

It's keeping ourselves contending together—not against each other, but together—for the faith of the good news, for people to bring people to trusting in the good news of new life, not frightened by the opposition, but salvation. The calling to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, that is, work it out in practice. We already have it in essence. And to go through the struggle, the growth struggle, it's not just a matter of faith, but it's suffering. This is not just the suffering of people who are opposed to the gospel; it's the suffering because of the flesh in us which is opposed to the gospel. It's the suffering that is the putting to death the practice of the body, the lifestyle activities of the flesh, the natural person.

As Paul said, he's struggling, he would much rather be home with the Lord in terms of personal enjoyment. But the Lord has called him here for this purpose. For us, the big thing is the struggle, the suffering involved in giving up the things that we are used to thinking give us life when they actually don't. Staying here to work it out and then let the Lord use the transformation taking place in our lives as a testimony to what He offers to anyone and everyone who's interested.

**Philippians 2:1**
We come to chapter two, and then we have four statements of if there is. The particular one of the four ways Greek has of saying if means if as is in fact the case, at least that's what the writer or speaker is intending to communicate. We have these four things: encouragement or exhortation in Christ, consolation or comfort out of love, commonality, fellowship of the spirit, deep attachment, compassion. These are to lead to commonality of our thinking, our love, our fellowship, and cooperation with each other.

**2:1a**
Encouragement exhortation. You've heard the term parakaleo. This is parakalesis, which is the noun form. Parakaleo is the verb form. To call alongside. This is encouragement, exhortation, and it's calling fellow believers alongside us with the Lord in the fight, the war of conquest. Erica mentioned Caleb and entering the land. Our battle is a war of conquest to take charge of our bodies and what is taking place in them, what they are being used for, what they're being used to fight for and fight against. This is a rallying cry, with which we are to be calling our fellow believers together in the common cause to advance the gospel. Not just, but very much importantly, including calling unbelievers to faith, but in the battle to work it out in our own lives, which is where this is going. That's the first element.

**2:1b**
The second is consolation or comfort out of love. And it's a very interesting thing. Etymologically, the two terms are related. To call alongside and then quite literally to speak alongside. In both cases, something is happening in communication with us together, intimate communication between us. In one case, it's calling others to join me where I am with the Lord, and the other is moving close to the other where that person is to comfort and console as they're struggling with the battle. As Paul just said, to suffer with him. Because, of course, it's hard.

**2:1c**
The third one, commonality or fellowship in the Spirit. This is koinonia, the Greek term, used in many churches and Christian groups for what we do as we assemble together and enjoy the commonality of our society, our association of fellow believers. The bond that results from that, of the real connection with each other, identification with each other, and the real appreciation love that we have for each other because of all that we have in common and how deeply we understand one another and what each of us is going through, an individual variation on the same general principle. And this really moving into more and more life and laying aside more and more of the living death of the flesh and its sinful practices.

**Philippians 2:1 — my resource for life**
Going back through these from an even more applicational viewpoint, I have found this first verse to be my well to fill up from. Steve and I, as you know, have been married 48 years. Which is a good start—it's a great start. But we found that any time we start trying to look to the other for life—it's easy to end up trying to get life from one another. We actually had a student come up, and it was one of those light bulb moments. The student came up, and after we had talked about the Lord's design for marriage, in all sincerity, he said, "You mean it's not all about me?"  Which is a reflection of what has been pushed so much on the campus. He really got it because he continued to date this same woman, and they're now married and doing so well. He really got the concept. It's not about me, but somewhere I need to fill up. It's so easy to try to get what I need from someone that I can see and touch and that I can talk to and get an answer back that I think is answering what I'm saying. It's very direct. It's easy to try to get life from one another.

I'm sure you've heard many people say, "I'm not in that relationship anymore because I wasn't getting my needs met." Oftentimes that's viewed as the reason to be in a relationship, to get my needs met. It's really expecting the other person to be God, and they can't. If I'm looking to another person for all that I need, I will be disappointed. If they look to me for all that they need, they will be disappointed because none of us are God. There is an element of need, but it's the other way around. It's having the privilege of being used of the Lord to contribute to His meeting the needs of the other person. If you have a community, that's what everybody is doing and focusing on doing. It's wonderful.

This is my place to fill up. This is that inexhaustible well from which flow the living waters to bless others. If I am needing encouragement, if I'm needing a kick in the behind, the exhortation, if I am needing counsel to start, Paraklesis includes all of those: comfort, console, encourage, exhort, entreat, urge, beseech, counsel. It's all in that one rich term. The Lord calls us first alongside Him, and we have all of that from Him. It's the word used for advocate, like lawyer. It really covers the range of what we need, and that is there in the Lord. That's where to find it.

Steeping yourself in the word, but not just for "yep, been there, done that, read it, I agree," but as my source of life. "Lord, please fill me with this. Thank you that you have by your Holy Spirit. Guide me by the wisdom of your word. What on earth do I do with this situation? I have no clue, but you do". As I'm in the word in different parts, not just favorite passages, and going in with the attitude from Isaiah 50:4, "The Lord God has given me the tongue of disciples, the one who's learned from him. I can speak because I'm learning from him, that I may know how to sustain the weary one with a word." That's because I've been sustained when I'm weary by the Lord. "He awakens me morning by morning. He awakens my ear to listen as a disciple, as a learner. The Lord God has opened my ear, and I was not disobedient, nor did I turn back."

A lot of times we have found if we're in the word and it seems kind of distant, dead, it's because we're just there for some intellectual input, which we're all so good at, instead of "Lord, whatever you say, I'm there." These are the words of life. My deepest longing is to join you in your values, your calling, your thoughts, your ways. Whatever you say, even if it's kind of scary or very not comfortable, I'm there. I'm going with you. As I have that attitude, the word really comes alive. The encouragement, the exhortation, the wisdom for life comes from Him.

Any consolation or comfort out of love. As Steve said, that's the paramuthion, which has the sense of speak closely and even has a sense of tenderness about it. As I'm struggling, as I'm overwhelmed at times, Jesus is there speaking tenderly to me, very close. That's where that tender comfort comes from, out of His love for me. And then I have that to give others.

The koinonia, the commonality of the spirit, I am never alone. There are times where we can feel deep loneliness and maybe estrangement from other people. Or as in a marriage, we've got young marriages that are in the midst of the honeymoon phase is over and really working things out phase. It's helpful to know that even if a chasm seems to open up between the two of you with what was just said or done, that I am never alone. I have the common life with the Lord Himself, with the spirit, and I have that with my fellow believer as well.

As we looked at in Ephesians last year, to preserve the unity of the spirit and the bond of peace. We have essential unity, even if it sure doesn't feel like it at the moment. First of all, that common life is between me and the Lord, the spirit who dwells within me. So I'm never alone, and that's so encouraging.

**2:1d**
Any deep attachment, that's the word that they used for viscera, "I love you with all my guts," and compassion. It's what we saw earlier in Philippians 1, the type of deep attachment, love from the core that Paul had for fellow believers. Certainly, as you said, Beth, and pointed out for the Philippians, that special relationship with the first church founded in Europe and founded out of suffering as usual, getting beaten up and thrown in prison. But how else do you found a church?

That's how the Lord views every one of us, no matter how difficult we can be at times. He did say over the disciples many times, and I know He said it over me, "Oh, you little faiths!" But it does not diminish in any way that deep love from the core that the Lord has for us, no matter what stupid thing we may have just done or thought again.

Compassion, instead of being repulsed by our need, as it's easy to be when there are repeat issues and what you do affects me, it's easy not to have compassion. But He who's affected more and His reputation by what we do, in our attitudes, He sees the need and moves in to help instead of moving away in disgust. One of the most beautiful places that is talked about in Scripture is Isaiah 49, where in verse 13 of Isaiah 49, "Break forth into joyful shouting for the Lord has comforted His people and will have compassion on His afflicted. But Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me and the Lord has forgotten me." There are times where we can feel forsaken and forgotten. "Can a woman forget her nursing child and have no compassion on the son of her womb? Even these may forget, but I will not forget you. I have inscribed you on the palms of My hands." That's Jesus on the cross, with each of us in mind, seeing our needs but rather than being repulsed, paying the greatest price to bring us out of bondage to Himself. Never ever give in to the feeling that you are abandoned or forsaken even by repeat issues.

I've had students ask me over the years, "is the medical crisis I'm going through, especially a repeated one, because of this sin that I was doing in secret? Is He punishing me?" And to be able to proclaim the Lord's forgiveness. And even when the student has come clear of it through the Lord, wondering if this is punishment for the past and saying "no, you've come to the Lord, whatever it is, is forgiven, even 70 times seven, and you have that deepest love of His from the core of His being and compassion". He's moving into hell, He's not distancing Himself from you. That's important to proclaim as well as to know for ourselves.

**The Lord's commitment to us**
Erica just touched on something in passing that really is beautiful. Because she was talking about the Lord's deep regard for us. Look at that list; it describes how Jesus ministers to us, himself, as well as through members of His body. He is constantly encouraging and exhorting us, calling us alongside Him in the cause of the gospel, giving life to others. He is constantly coming to us as we're hurting. He is with us always. We'll see that stated in so many words in chapter four. And His deep attachment for us and compassion goes way beyond anything we can imagine, his commitment to us.

And remember when Moses was despairing, and God was talking about "the people *you* brought up out of Egypt". And Moses is saying, "these people *you* brought up out of Egypt..." is wonderful. And Moses says, you've got to show me Your character. You've got to go with us. And the Lord says, "I can't go in the midst. I might end up having to destroy you guys". Well, at least you have to show me your character. And the Lord does. And it starts with "the Lord, the Lord God, compassionate...". This is the attachment of a mother to her child at all ages of life, as long as the mother continues to live, the fruit of her womb, and she cannot let go of that, except through real perversion of what motherhood is all about. Even when women go through such terrible stuff that they lose sight of that love, that love's still there. The quote is Exodus 34:6-7, where the Lord proclaims the heart of who He is, and many passages from David and Isaiah refer back to that: counting on His character. That's helpful to realize as we're looking at things that we are called to in our relationships with each other, and that is all an expression of Jesus' life, and it's expressed through us as it's His life in us. But it's that same life that he expresses towards us directly as well as through unbelievers.

This resource now flows into our relationships with real people, as challenging as real people can be, including us. We return to joy. Again and again, joy. And as you heard us say, we have concluded that a very effective working definition of joy is joy is "the emotion that accompanies the sense of either experiencing true life or expecting it". 

**2:2 — Unity!**
"Make my joy complete that you have the same thing in mind, having the same love of one accord, keeping mindful of the one thing," which will be elaborated on later.

Unity, unity, unity. Unity of our thinking, unity of our concern for each other, and our acting on that. Unity of our understanding and unity of contribution, not identical, but harmonious and working together to accomplish the same thing. The impartation and encouragement building up of true life and people who welcome the gift from the Lord. This is not normal. We know from the news and our own lives that when you get human beings together, unity is not what normally happens, especially when it's a long-term relationship, whether it's personal, work, or national relationship, unity is not what normally happens.

It's wonderful to hear in the immediate aftermath of the election, to hear from both of the major parties, expressions of concern for unity of our nation and society. It's wonderful to hear, and it does cause joy and anticipation. Now we all have to work hard to make it actually happen. And pray, pray, pray. Hopefully, out of the divisiveness and polarization that has grown recently, this is an indicator that we've learned that is not healthy and not the place to go.

This can be accomplished only on a much more basic level without the Lord than the real thing that the Lord does. Life of all sorts on all levels happens when people are truly unified, even if only in a limited sense. I'll give you a secular example of this, which was delightful before the elections yesterday and results.

Through our daughters, I got turned on to some other news sources that are online. One is the Free Press, and one is 1440, which is not mainline news with all of the propaganda aspect of it. No news service is propaganda-free. These two news sources are particularly unbiased. Not that any is truly unbiased, but not nearly as biased as most of the mainline press. If you become aware of other really unbiased news sources to the degree that that's possible, mention it to us, please.

"Whatever Happens, Love Thy Neighbor" was the title. "I'm a Democrat living in a red rural county. Trump supporters have mowed my lawn, walked my dog, and eroded my prejudices with their humanity. And whatever happens, love thy neighbor". This was the picture. It's of all the red voting signs, and a solitary blue voting sign. To give a bit of a glimpse of what this person has felt. Then watched their prejudices, and this is just secular, eroded through kindness and care.

And that's where this passage goes: the opportunities before us, no matter what happened yesterday. And this passage is actually beautiful for that. Here Paul's saying, in verse two: "Make my joy complete in that you have the same thing in mind, having the same love of one accord, keeping mindful of the one thing."

Since Genesis three, humans have judged by sight, determining what's good and what's evil, what looks like it's life-enhancing and what will destroy life. We all come up with different equations, so even within church fellowships there are cliques, gossip, and horrible church splits, as well as within families and marriages. Natural human beings don't unify. And so this is radical lifestyle, but we know that it is not just a dull, drab, intellectual uniformity. It's not saying that we should all be the same. The Lord loves variety. That's part of the challenge, how different we are.

If you add in ethnicity, family backgrounds, personal taste, experience, and then you add immaturity and sin to the mix, there just isn't a chance of real unity apart from the Lord. Yet, in the Lord, there is. We are so marvelously diverse in our different ways, sinful elements in our lives. But we are withand God's gifts as well. We know that the Spiritual gifts are different and we're given a different mix of spiritual gifts. And it's easy, again, to divide over that. As Jesus prepared His disciples for Him to go to the cross, they argued over who was greatest. We can look down on them, but we could end up doing exactly the same thing.

A friend who'd been a missionary for decades decided to do something about her older body. She used to be a professional ballerina. So she joined a dance class and immediately she was saying, "oh my gosh, I was looking around and thinking, well, I'm better than her and her". That comparative judgmentalism from the flesh immediately kicks in. The call to unity is radical because it is not based on being the same. It is not based on having all the same opinions or tastes. It's based on unity with the Lord, with His thinking.

> I'd like to hear your perspective. Listening to you talk about unity and community and the natural human nature bent to not operate that way. I'm thinking about something, a principle that I think is accurate and is true whether it's a secular or a spiritual situation. What our human nature, maybe it's just the way God wired us, is if we are with other people and we have a common purpose, and that is the focus of our being together. Then there can be a wonderful kind of unity, whether it's a job. I experienced that a number of times over my years at PBCC and different things I was involved in where there was just such camaraderie and support and bonding because we all, I'm thinking particularly of being in the choir, a common purpose. And even politically, that's true. The people who were on the Democratic side had a common purpose, and the people who were on the Republican side, or if you want to divide it that way, had a common purpose. So there was a bonding, and what you're teaching us tonight is that our common purpose as believers is to be what you're teaching us tonight. Look to the Lord for the resources and the common purposes to minister the gospel, minister the love of Christ to others.

And then there's place for real diversity within that. This verse here brings to mind a saying that ran through the intern scribes at PBC way back in the 70s. People were constantly saying "the main thing is to keep the main thing, the main thing." And if we do that, but we don't get so focused on just the main thing, then we really can make many wonderful differential, complementary, cooperative contributions to pursuing the main thing. But there's real joy in that.

Cora, you've been part of putting out prayer letters with us, and we have quite a diverse group, but boy, do we have a good time. That's a perfect example because we're all there to put stuff in the envelopes. That's why we're there. But there's this community that comes out of it. Getting to encourage one another in the Lord and laugh and share stories while doing it. It's fun because there are various tasks involved, and most of the people involved participate in various of the tasks during the time. But there are people who particularly gravitate to one thing or another, assembling the things that go into the envelope or stuffing envelopes or whatever it is. And then also people bring things, they bring things that don't have anything to do directly with putting out the mailing. But people bring cheese and crackers and various stuff. It's wonderful.

> And I'll just confess, since we're on that topic, that every time I go, all of that is true, and I love it. But I also have to push back on my thoughts of "I could do this so much more efficiently if you would only do this this way or that way, because that's my inner admin kicks in, and I really have to say, 'let it go'. Just stuff the envelope. Don't worry about how efficient it is". 

Steve has gone through the same process with that.

One of the many things that the Lord used to prepare me for this was from the time I was little, I helped put out mailings for my father for his business, and there was a system and a method for everything. I did learn efficient ways to do a lot of these things that the natural things that almost all of us would do is very inefficient. But you have to make sure that we don't become so concerned with being efficient that it becomes mechanical and the life is squeezed out of it. 

> The most efficient way is not necessarily the right way. Because God is more concerned about individuals and, as you say, the unity rather than efficiency. 

Amen. Yes. And there's a lot of ministry that goes on around that table while stuffing the envelopes. It's a wonderful example as we're doing this.

**2:3 — joining Jesus to bless others**
So what are the things that trip it up? "Neither according to selfish ambition, nor according to empty conceit, but in humility of mind regarding one another as being of higher concern than oneself. Each focusing not on the matters of self, but also on the matters of others." I have to comment on that last bit at the outset. It's wonderful how Paul puts things, and translators constantly try to... There's always the temptation to try to get more interpretive and be helpful that way, but accidentally, unintentionally, to take the punch out of what is said. But the text literally says, focusing not on the matter of self, but also on the matter of others. I love that because the point is, don't make it your focus to pursue your things. Pursue, make your focus pursuing yourself, the matters, the needs, concerns of others. But that word also says, if you do that, if instead of focusing on your own thing, you're focusing on others' needs, both will get done. You can't help but be conscious of what you need. I love the realism of Scripture.

A really sad example of getting a little too helpful in trying to interpret the passages. I'm sure most of us have heard the notion that has gone through the church that the Bible tells us we have to love ourselves because it says "love your neighbor as yourself." Well, you can't love your neighbor as yourself if you don't love yourself, so you need to step back and make step one love myself. Once I really love myself, then I can love other people. But that's not what it's saying. It's saying, you know, you can't help but love yourself.

People often say, "well, I don't love myself", not in the sense of thinking "I'm wonderful" necessarily, but you cannot overlook your interest in maintaining your life and quality of life. That's automatic. Ray Stedman liked to talk about the concern of the members of the body for one another, really in the context of spiritual gifts and our need for one another, even the seemingly unimportant things. Ray illustrated that by saying, "Recently, I had an ingrown toenail, and it was really painful. And you know what? All the other members of my body all stayed awake all night out of concern for my poor ingrown toenail." We can't help it.

"Love your neighbor as yourself. So I have to love myself first." The true version of that is really welcoming how loved I am by the Lord. That's where my worth, my well-being comes from, not trying to work up love for myself. I've got that naturally. The problem is overcoming that kind of love for self. I may not think I'm an awesome person, but I am concerned about myself. The more I may think I'm not an awesome person, the more and more concerned I tend to become about myself. The key is welcoming how absolutely loved I am by the Lord, and my worth comes from Him. Then I'm free to focus more on the love of others.

An example of this is the group in India that is coming to the Lord the fastest right now—the unseeables. People didn't even know there was a caste under the untouchables, but these are the unseeables who aren't allowed out in light. They're considered to have sinned so badly in their life before that they're not allowed out. This is punishment for what they have done in a past life, so it's right to treat them terribly. This group is coming to the Lord faster than any other group because believers found out about them and told them about the love of Christ. There is a God who loves you tremendously, and you are of the highest worth. They had eyes, ears, and hearts to respond to that. We've heard that from quite a few who've worked long in India in recent decades.

**Selfish ambition and empty conceit**

These are the two impediments: selfish ambition, trying to pursue and attain what is in accordance with my wishes, my concerns, the things I want to get done, the things that I want to acquire or attain, and then empty conceit. Conceit is having a high and particularly a higher than appropriate opinion of oneself. We think about people who are in a group setting out to get what they want and use other people in the process. We know what kind of effect that has, and it's anything but unifying. And then the empty conceit, the people who are so full of themselves, and they want everybody, their whole message, their whole communication is, "hey, look at me. Aren't I wonderful? And don't you wish you could be like me?" And most people are saying, "no, it's not about you". It's so divisive.

I may have mentioned we had students who were working in mainland China, and there was one lab colleague who said openly, "I am god". Everybody around him found him the most horrible person to work with. The only person he cared about was himself, and he was caustic, and he climbed all over everybody, and everybody hated him. He was alone because of his high opinion of himself. But he started to come toward the Lord.

> The NIV says "vain conceit," and that I see a connection. How is conceit empty? Because you say empty conceit. 

The even older translations talk about "vainglory," trying to have everybody form a wonderful opinion of them based on emptiness. Nothing. Based on nothing that really had any value. Vain, empty, futile, useless. Because it's not based on reality. Then there is the idea of vanity, people who are so concerned about things that just don't matter. People who are obsessively concerned with fashion and makeup and fitting the latest mold, which just makes them moldy. These things fight against unity; they divide people, and this selfish ambition, empty conceit. All these things, of course, are distortions of things of real value. We are to be ambitious, not for our own selfish benefit, but we are to be eager to advance the gospel—not to cut as many notches in the binding of our Bible as we can, but a real concern for people who don't have the life that God designed them to have and wants them to have if they can come to the point of recognizing the value of it.

The empty conceit has many variations. We are called to seek glory, but the glory we're called to seek is not self-glory or self-glorification, not holding ourselves up as someone to be worshipped. We are designed to glorify God. We are designed to be living representations of the reality of who God is. Although we fall way short of that in practice, we can develop and express so much more of that than most people do. The contrast really draws people in, that they know is different, good, and desirable, and they want to know more about it.

**Is it safe to not advance & promote myself?**

One student working in tech mentioned that in a lot of standard business now, if you are not self-promoting, you're seen as weak, and people will walk all over you. And so one of the questions is whether it's safe to approach life this way. 

I remember hearing a debate between an atheist professor and a Christian. The atheist professor was snide and sarcastic. This young whippersnapper, really, who was pitted against a seasoned pastor, elder professor who actually loved the Lord and was highly respected worldwide. And very humble.

Superficially, to people who were selfishly ambitious and vainly conceited, it could seem like this guy really just whomped all over this old geezer. But the students didn't reach that conclusion by the end at all because the believer remained caring and was honoring towards this sarcastic guy. But I remember the sarcastic professor mocked, "The Bible says to turn the other cheek. That is stupid. You just get beaten up that way." He was from a rough background, and there's truth in that, but is it safe to not care for number one? Is it safe to make caring for your neighbor more important?

We are supposed to care for number one, but number one is the Lord. If the Lord weren't in the picture, it would be stupid. But he is. He is here, pouring life into us. It's out of that that the rivers of living water pour into others and bless them at cost. It's agape love, a radical signpost in the ancient world and today because it is not taught or promoted. We think we've moved beyond this. It's just the myth, the crazy myth of duty. If done just from duty, it's dead. But if it is from out of my filling up with the Lord, so I have so much life, and asking, "Who can I give this to? Who can I bless?" then life becomes an adventure full of joy.

**"Who do we get to love today, Lord?"**

Even today, I wake up with the thought,"who do we get to love today, Lord?" I've got a bunch on my calendar already, but I know He'll add more. Today, I was with someone we've known professionally, and she asked me at the end of a professional time together how I was doing after the election. I told her I'm doing really well because Jesus is on the throne and nothing important has changed at all, no matter who's on top. This person wants to get together with Erica and learn more about this. She is a believer but was in deep despair. It was a key time to be there at the end of a professional meeting to encourage her. Where's the hope? I gave her some Scripture and action points for prayer, noting that Nero was on the throne when most of the church was growing like crazy. One of the worst tyrants of all history. But that did not stop anything that the Lord was calling His people to. In fact, the gospel was spreading like wildfire because of the contrast.j

**Peace in the midst of uncertainty about election results**

A wonderful thing happened just in the last day or two before the election. I came to a beautiful realization that morning as I woke up that it really didn't matter how the election turned out. I was truly at peace and even eager to walk with the Lord through the scenario that seemed evident. If the candidate we were interested in did not win, it was wonderful. There had been so much concern, and we've had it, too, that if the election goes this way, there are going to be tough things. People on both sides were feeling that, and it was a wonderful realization.

The selfish ambition, the empty conceit brings me to a conclusion. One thing that was really evident yesterday was that many people were in shock because they had expected the outcome to be very different. It was just not what they expected. What occurred to me is the media is like people trying to take the pulse of the nation using their thumb. If you've been trained in how to take a pulse, it's important that you don't press your thumb on the person's artery because you will feel your own pulse more strongly than the patient's pulse, resulting in a false reading. I think that's how the press has been trying to read the public and report what the public is feeling. They're so conscious of their own biases that their reporting comes out distorted. Whether that's true or not, I thought it was amusing seeing that connection.

> I think that's a great illustration of conflict there. What's interesting to me as a Christian and as a member of a family where I don't have very many Christians—my daughter, that's about it—is if we don't start with the sovereignty of God, we can get upset in many different directions. Part of what I'm experiencing is even within Christian friends where we had a different perspective on who we thought was the best candidate, people that I have never had a conversation about politics with. People I've known my whole life or for decades. All of a sudden that's there, and it's creating tension, and that's just new. Maybe that's part of how God is getting us, me, like when I say us, I mean me and my family member or me and my friend, to dialogue about these things. Always before, it's just in the background. I have no idea how people vote or anything, but all of a sudden, I have tension with a close cousin and things like that.
>
> I also had peace about the outcome just a day or so before the vote. A lot of that stuff was just, I wasn't even paying attention to it anymore. But the peace of knowing that even if the person I thought would be the best person didn't win, God had a purpose in that too. That was just a lot of that kind of peace you were talking about you had, Steve. 

You're describing exactly what seemed evident to me. And looking at how the Lord used people during the whole Soviet era: we know a number of people in the then Eastern Bloc, Soviet Bloc countries who are believers. We have heard testimonies and seen the effects of what God did in people's lives in spite of real hardships. That certainly contributed to that peace that I came to a day or two before the election.

We certainly saw when we were teaching various times in Romania, when the secret police were still very busy, the believers from the underground church were caring so well for others, even when they had nothing. When we were there, we learned so much about hospitality. When we were teaching a conference, just as the wall was coming down, we have pieces of the Berlin Wall because we were going through at that point to teach in East Germany a month before reunification. It was kind of fun having those souvenirs from Checkpoint Charlie because I have no problem remembering where I was on my 21st birthday. I was detained by the East German border police at Checkpoint Charlie and have some pieces of the wall from that spot.

The point was, even though they had nothing, every meal, there was a plate piled high with meat and all sorts of stuff in front of our places and the girls. Milk was really hard to obtain. Mothers hurt because they had to work and couldn't nurse their babies, and there wasn't milk available. Our girls had milk every meal. Everybody else had a plate to pass around their table with tomatoes and cucumber slices. That's breakfast. And bread. And we've got all this meat. We went around distributing the meat to them. They said, don't you like it? Yes. But you share with us. We want to share with you. We learned a lot about the generous heart, caring for others from believers who had nothing. We got to know believers who had nothing and yet were super generous. We didn't find out until well after things turned that they were people who had had a lot that they had lost, that had been confiscated, and a lot of their property was being returned to them. It was just amazing. These people who had basically lost everything, still acting like they were rich.

**Genuine vs false humility: filled with life or performative?**

The whole thing really comes back to these last two verses, the not acting out of selfish ambition or empty conceit, not trying to exalt themselves, but with humility of mind, not humility of outward action. We've all known people who have decided to act very humbly. And it's anything but. This is the real thing where their outlook, their thinking is very humble. Their concern is for others, not for themselves. To watch how the Lord takes care of them and how alive they become. It's not duty. If you do it out of duty, it's dead. But when you're filling up with the Lord's life and then poised, how can I bless today? How can I encourage today?

As Erica was pointing out from Jesus' teaching, it's the river of life just welling up and overflowing because of the focus on the Lord and receiving that life from Him. It really becomes fun. It can be with anybody. We have had a new mail carrier for the last couple of years. He was just kind of dourly doing his own job and no personal anything and didn't respond to greetings. Steve and I, at various times, would run up our steep driveway and say, I can get the mail and save you a little bit of a trip. You get so much exercise. And now that mail carrier, if either one of us see him, he practically leaps out of his truck waving just this huge smile because instead of viewing him as just a function, there are people who really love him and are delighted to see him and care about him. It just has obviously made his day. At times he drives by while Erica is out, and he takes the initiative to wave to her.

We had the same thing with the mail carrier where we go on retreat to work on publication, which we will be doing very shortly. I appreciate your prayers for that. When I first engaged with him, he acted almost like I was interfering, slowing his efficiency. He was a young man and socially shy, and I would imagine not a very high self-regard. We're just friendly with him. Now he sees us, waves with a big smile, and delights to tell us about his vacation, going down to Oregon to be with his family. It's just wonderful. The Lord loves everybody. I really delight in what Erica likes to say: none of us will ever meet any person that Jesus doesn't love.

> One of the passages that keeps coming to my mind is Jesus washing the feet of the disciples. I remember years ago when I was reading through and came to chapter 13 of John: "Jesus knowing what was going to come and that, you know, I can't remember it now, but knowing from the Father who are in this world, he loved them to the end." It was the unselfconsciousness that really struck me. Even though He knew all this stuff that was going to happen, His confidence and relationship with His Father set Him free to be able to now serve His disciples by washing their feet. Then, of course, His explanation of what they should understand from what He just did.
>
> In a way, that's what I'm hearing you guys say, that your connection with the Lord and your pretty much 24/7 awareness of His love and the resource of that just frees you to spend 20 minutes talking to the mail carrier. It's that freedom to serve that comes from knowing the Father. It's not just working up a good self-sacrificing attitude. I can have lots of conceit about how good I am. Exactly. Much of the Bible I can recite, and you're connecting with Jesus. John 13 is perfect because there's the model. He's not selfishly ambitious. He's about to be given authority over everything. The empty conceit, if anybody had the basis to have a very high opinion of himself, it would not be empty. But humility is what we always see. The foot washing is part of that. I think the human where I saw was convicted about that as if I had known then in a situation where I know what's coming is going to be difficult and painful and not even really deserved. I'd have been all caught up with being sorry for myself. I wouldn't have been able to serve anybody. That's what really struck me about that event.
>
> He was so free. Free of self, free of self-consciousness, not having to nurse his own fears. I still can't even articulate it very well. 

You're absolutely right. It wasn't about him... and yet the reality is it was all about him.

"I didn't come to serve myself. I came to serve the one who sent me". Always serving someone else, not self. There's a freedom and a joy in that. He transforms us, even if the task may not be glorious at all.

With my mom, she couldn't walk for the last eight years of her life and was in skilled nursing. Constant back pain. There were so many believers who were serving as CNAs, cleaning up every imaginable gross stuff and getting yelled at because people are in pain. And so they're grouchy with anybody. Abandoned by their families and resentful of that. The elderly people, but quite a number of these CNAs were believers and just loved their patients as if they were their own family. It was so beautiful.

One man that I got to know, a number of them as I was coming and going caring for my mom. One worked two full-time jobs, one on the other side of the bay, one over on this side. He would arrive half an hour early, even, I don't know when he slept, to pray for each of his patients. He expressed the love of Christ to them, even when they were grouchy and smelly and just not nice to be around. He had so much joy. It was amazing. I learned a lot from him as well.

There's another one of those who was in NICU, nursing assistant, neonatal intensive care, with babies, newborns, who almost certainly were not going to survive. The parents there, desperate for sleep and trying to be with their baby as much as possible. He would hold these babies and sing hymns to them. The parents would calm down. He'd be holding the baby next to his heart, and the parents would say things like, "Oh, it's so wonderful the nurse was singing lullabies to my baby." He blessed and blessed.

Erica's little brother, who's anything but little, was like that. He worked in a severe burn unit and could take little children who were severely burned and in intense pain that nothing will touch. He would hold them, and they would calm down. He loves Jesus.

We should pray.

> Lord, thank you that you pour so much. You pour yourself into us. Thank you that you are life, our joy, our security, our work. And thank you that out of that well of living water, we have so much to flow out to others. Thank you that there's so much joy in that as we get to love and care for others around us with you, not out of duty, but just filled up with your life and looking to you and to others for opportunities to blow that out to share.
>
> Lord, please fill us up with You and open our eyes to see the opportunities to love people and care for them, even just with prayer and calls and texts, as well as direct opportunities. Thank You for the joy of joining You in a world that is so focused on self. Use us as lights of Your presence. In Your name, amen.
