> Lord Jesus, thank You that You are right here wherever each one of us is. Thank You that You number and know the hairs on our head (or the lack thereof), but that You care deeply about each of us and know everything that's going on within as well as without. Lord, we ask that You will meet with us tonight, that we will meet with You, that our ears will be open to You, to the truth that You are underlining for each of us to walk in. Lord, may this be an evening of growth and an evening of equipping to help many others. Thank You for each one of our dear friends gathered together for the riches of Your word. Would You please work mightily among us. We're thankful to be Yours. May Allan get home. May that bridge be fixed for the train to go. Thank You, Lord. May this computer work for the entirety of the class. Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.

**Anxiety Distracts Us From Focusing on the Lord**

As you know, for the last two weeks, we've been focused on different passages that are very helpful for dealing with the human issue of anxiety. In this section of our course, we're taking a number of weeks to deal with the issue of anxiety because, as we all are very aware, this is a broken world in need of redemption. The Lord is on the move, but there's still much that needs redeeming. There's a lifetime of things that we tend to worry about. As we talked about in past weeks, we can be collectors of things to worry about, and it's easy to collect but not let go of any. As if our knowing about things to worry about protects us somehow, although it just adds to the burdens that can sometimes make it much more difficult to actually deal with it.

Some of it is inherited. My dear grandmother used to make lists, and she was honest about it. The title was "Things to Worry About." I would share with her that prayer was actually effective in dealing with those things rather than just listing and worrying about them. But she seemed to prefer worry. Many of us do the same, although we're usually not honest enough to list it as things to worry about. Oftentimes, that's in fact what we're doing.

Two weeks ago, we looked at powerful adjunct passages that let us know that the adversary, the devil, uses worry as a way of distracting us away from focusing on the Lord and resting in Him. It is a powerful form of spiritual warfare. If you've given your life to Jesus, you are His forever. Nobody can snatch you out of the hands of Jesus. But our adversary, the devil, the accuser, does all he can to deflect us from resting in the Lord and participating with Him because we're dangerous to his program when we are resting in the Lord and participating with the Lord. So he tries to use things like worry and distraction and stress to deflect us so that the screen of our minds is filled with things to worry about.

We're all created in the image of God (Genesis 1) and commissioned to rule. We use the word manage today. We are all inveterate problem solvers. We collect things to solve, and worries fall in that category. Somehow, if I collect them, I'm feel I'm protected from them and can figure out how to deal with them. But we need the perspective from above.

**Remember "The Lord is at hand"**

Last week we were in Philippians 4:5 discussing the effective thing to do when anxiety hits: to know that the Lord Himself is right here. "The Lord is at hand" just as much as any one of us are here physically. He is here. He is not visible, but just as active, just as much here. I don't need to carry things myself if the Lord of the universe (who absolutely adores you) is here. I don't need to take it on myself. Instead, as Philippians 4 talks about, instead of giving myself to the distraction of worry, let it be a stimulus to jump into the Lord's lap and tell Him all about it with thanksgiving. "Thank you that you're here. Thank you that you're the Redeemer. I'm entrusting this to You." 

That's the effective thing to do. Make a lifestyle of it. Then the peace of God guards my heart and my mind in Christ Jesus. When it's being attacked by the evil one with worry and stress, that becomes a distraction. Instead, jump into the Lord's lap, tell Him all about it with thanksgiving. "Lord, I trust You for this."

Steve and I will pray exactly that. "Lord, I trust You. This is bigger than I am but not bigger than You are, and You are right here. I trust You to lead me in this and to protect me. You promise to cause this to work together for good. I trust You to do that. Part of that involves You conforming me to the image of Your Son (Romans 8:28-30) and glorifying me." He's enabling me to grow into the beautiful character of God that's already in the core of my being by the Holy Spirit. I'm learning to welcome this in how I think and how I approach people and circumstances, my attitudes, my words, my actions. And that's a lifetime of growth.

A friend of ours said regarding Romans 8:28 to 30, "Any old thing will do." Whatever the circumstances, no matter how overwhelming or tiny, as I trust the Lord and turn to Him, thank Him, and ask Him, "What do we do with this and how can I grow out of it?" He is there guaranteeing and promising to grow me through this. And He will do it. He completes what He begins. Nothing can separate me from the love of God.

**A Lifestyle Shift**

We looked last week at, "Where do I put my mind?" It requires a lifestyle shift. When things come up to worry about, I now commit myself before the Lord to jump to His lap with thanksgiving and entrust it to Him. Then I put my focus on who He is, His character that's always available, and where I already see Him at work. "If anything is worthy of praise, set your mind on these things. The things you've heard and seen in me, practice these things and the God of peace will be with you" (Philippians 4:8b-9).

In 4:7, it's the peace of God guarding my heart and my mind, because I'm taking them to the effective place, which is the Lord. Now I'm filling the focus of my mind with the Lord who is enormous. The issue is actually quite small in comparison. I'm thanking Him for where He's at work. Then I'm looking to, "How can I partner with You in these circumstances? Where have I seen mature believers partnering with You in similar circumstances?" So I can walk those paths following Biblical characters like Paul, Jesus, or mature believers around me. I see, "Oh, that's how to trust the Lord and to serve Him in circumstances like this." So I practice these things. Then the God of peace is with me in 4:9.

Before it was the peace of God, now it's the God of peace. I get to partner with Him to bring His presence, His peace to some very unsettled, conflict-ridden, scary situations.

**How to Not Be Distracted**

That completes our review of last week in Philippians. Now we're focusing on how to change in any area. We previously explored this a number of years ago in Romans, but now we're using a one-page summary that Steve has prepared. This summary emphasizes, "How do I actually make a lifestyle change with the Lord?" I'm not just praying and waiting for God to zap me, but I'm partnering with Him to make real progress, regardless of the area. We'll apply this to the issue of worry. Our encouragement is, don't just fill your head with more theology (thinking, "Yeah, I've heard that, I've taught it, but I'm not living it out - or not much"). It's about making a lifestyle change to truly live it and addressing the core of what keeps you worrying.

Next week, we'll use the same template to examine specific areas that cause worry and vulnerabilities that the adversary exploits, often leading to disproportionate anxiety. Worry is one form of anxiety, but the deeper issue is anything that distracts us and takes our attention away from the Lord. Remember, "The Lord is at hand. Be anxious for nothing."

We've mentioned it several times because it's really key that the Greek word for "anxious" means "having a distracting concern." The concern may not always be a worry. It can be something positive; it can be temptation; it can be anything (even a perfectly worthwhile experience like reading a book or newspaper - but it's not the right time). One of the ways that the adversary tries to seduce us away from Jesus is by using all kinds of things that are perfectly fine in and of themselves. The problem is that they distract us from doing what we should be doing at that time. So it's good, but it's important to ask, "Is it right? Is it the right time?"

**Romans 5-8 on How to Change**

You should have received a two-page PDF with a cartoon attached to your class email announcement. The issue here really is, "How to appropriate the wisdom of Scripture?" We read Scripture, hear it in church, and study it; but even when we agree that it's true and beneficial, we often don't act on it. The question is, "Why not? What do we do about it?" This is true of anything that I want to change in my life. We've written this in our series of books based on Romans 5 to 8, "After God and I have agreed (not to mention a bunch of other people who probably agree), on something that we both want to see change in my life, how do I make it happen?" That's what we understand the heart of Romans is about. It's taken only 55 years to unpack it and get it down to one page (miracles are still active today).

Using Philippians 4, let's look at this instruction on "How to Change." As Erica mentioned, we've went through it in detail about two years ago. As you look at this sheet, there are two things. First of all, there are seven imperatives (seven things that are essential to changing, the essential action points). There's a lot more detail, but we've reduced it down to, "Okay, what do I do with all this?"

There have been more books written on Romans than all of the Stanford libraries could possibly hold one copy of. Yet, the church fails to benefit, to a large degree, from the very practical instruction in here, which really is how to "work out your salvation with fear and trembling" (which is what we just connected with recently in Philippians 2:12). How do we work it out in practice? How do we get free of the things that are not godly and not righteous? And how do we develop the things that are righteous, the counterparts to those things that God is saving us from? He's sanctifying us to make us holy in practice (whole, righteous, godly). So how do we do it?

**Present!**

It was really helpful for me to study this. I've known for years there are three uses of the imperative verb "present" (marked with an exclamation point in the summary). For a long time, I thought these are the only imperatives in Romans. Then I thought, "I better be sure." So I scanned them and pulled out all the imperative verbs in Romans. I found, "Oh, there weren't three, there were seven." At first, I thought, "Oh no! Now what?" But then I realized, "No, they're all at those three points." So I was right. It was those three points.

**Imperative 1 (Step 1): Know Who You Are (Romans 6:11)**

For example, in the first step of change, there are four of the seven imperatives. Actually, the first imperative really is not part of one of the steps. It's the foundation that is necessary before taking any of the steps. That is: Know who I am. Who am I now as a new creature in Christ as opposed to who I've been from natural birth until the present time? Once I came to faith in Jesus and welcomed His life in me (which our Heavenly Father gave me by placing the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of true life in me), now I'm not who I was.

We pointed this out before. The difference between a natural, fallen, sinful human being, and a new creature in Christ is whether or not the individual has the Holy Spirit within. A natural human being consists of two parts: the personal life in a physical body. That's what secular science and psychology recognize. However, there is actually a third element—a spirit—which is often folded into all of the immaterial aspects. Once you have the Spirit of God, you are a new creature in Christ. You become a whole human being with all three components necessary for full life.

If I take a person who does not have the Holy Spirit and I put the Holy Spirit in, now what do I have? I have a new creature in Christ. That person is not what they once were. Initially, there may not be much evidence. Sometimes there's very strong evidence, such as a sudden, strong hunger for the Word or a strong drive to pray. There may be a sudden joy, peace, or, as in Erica's case, a letdown. She was immediately depressed because she had fought so hard against and then received the Lord. Her first awareness was that she caved. But then, within half an hour, she was filled with so much peace that when her mom asked days later, "What happened to you? You're different now," Erica got to tell her about asking the Lord Jesus into her heart. Her mom could see the difference, and Erica got to lead her to the Lord a month later.

The first thing is to know who you are. In Romans 6:11, Paul says, "Consider yourself dead indeed to sin, but living for God in Christ Jesus." The implication is to know who you are, recognize who you are, count on it, and act on it. The importance of that is knowing that I am radically changed within. As Steve has talked about, "My will, the core of my being, is filled with the living God Himself. My will is joined with His. At the core of my being, I am His through and through, but I still have all the old life, history, and inertia. The rest of my life here on earth is learning to join with the Lord to grow into who I am at the core. I'm not trying to become something I'm not. I'm growing into who I am at the core, bringing that out into my thinking, words, attitudes, and actions."

I give Jesus control over more of my life by means of the power of the Spirit within me. It's God at work outside me, and it's God at work in me. But I get to participate. A lot of believers are stuck because they see the difference between how they live and what's in the Word. They pray and then just wait for God to do it to them. Romans is very clear. The Lord offers, gives us the dignity of participating with Him. We came to Him through free will response to His offer of love, presence, and saving. We grow through free will choice to join with Him, to welcome His work, changing us from within. So this is how to do it.

**Imperative 2 (Step 1): Do not passively let sin reign (Romans 6:12)**

We're dead indeed to the sovereign control of sin. Now, "sovereign" is not in that statement, but it's meaning in the rest of the sentence. Do not let sin reign (that is, exercise sovereign authority, irresistible authority). A sovereign has total control, total authority over his subjects, including the prerogative of life or death. Do not let sin reign in your mortal body. A mortal body is a body that is living but is capable of dying. (There's a living body and a dead body. A living body may be mortal. In this world, all living bodies are mortal.)

The first of the three steps in how to change has to do with the will. It's about alliance. The Trinity is an alliance of three free-willed Gods into an alliance, meaning that they have one and the same objective. They each contribute to it, and they are one God. This may provide a little insight into the mystery of the Trinity. How can they be one and be three at the same time? The oneness is absolutely one in nature and in purpose or objective. God's purpose, in the simplest terms, is to give life, to give the same life that God has. That includes participation in alliance with God. Because we have the Holy Spirit in us, we participate in the alliance of the Trinity. We are not God, but we have one of the three members of the Godhead living in us. We participate in that relationship and participate in pursuit of that common objective.

The issue is: "What is exercising absolute control over me?" This is the first of the three things about sin that keep me from changing (the flesh in me fights against becoming godly in practice, fights against becoming righteous, fights against obeying God, fights against pleasing God). Those three are identified in Romans 1. The first has to do with the will and its compulsions (literally lusts). {We don't understand it these days. Because, although it originally was a general term for any strong drive, it has come down in our modern usage to be applied almost exclusively to sexuality and sexual lust, it is counterproductive to translate it as "lust." But to show that the word is actually neutral, Jesus says at the Last Supper, (I don't know of a single Bible that translates that way), but what Jesus said to the disciples literally is, "I have lusted to eat this Passover with you." It's good that Bibles don't translate it that way because then people will start to think becoming a Christian is just another one of these weirdo sex cults.}

This is the thing: a lust, this compulsion, is a logical imperative. It follows from our perception of whether something has implications for life or implications for death. When I look at something, do I see an opportunity for life? Or do I see a threat of death? When I look at the true God, I should see an opportunity for life, really the only Source of true life. But He says, "lest you let sin reign." This is passive. In your mortal body, you may continue to obey its compulsions. What are those compulsions and how did they get there? It's very simple. This all follows from the survival instinct, which is God's creation for our benefit. It means that when we see something as a source of life or an opportunity for life, then if we really believe it's vitally necessary for life, I've got to strive after it and fight for it with everything I've got because my life depends on it. At least some aspect of life depends on it. So I've got to go for it with everything I've got. But if I view something as being a mortal threat, something that can block life or take it away or destroy it, then I have to fight against it with everything I've got. My life depends on it. I need to keep that up unless and until I die trying.

**Examples**

I'll share a couple of examples. We've had former students, friends who are professors in medical schools, who have decided that they have to be "the best." It's usually good things that Christians choose, but they've made it too important. "It's what I'm living for, what I will sacrifice everything for." They have decided, "I have to be the top, the best. I have to be voted the best professor every year. I will sacrifice family. I will sacrifice sleep, health, whatever it takes to be able to attain to this. I will fight for it and I will fight against anything that seems to block it."

When you find yourself fighting for something, it alerts you there's probably what Scripture calls an idol behind it—something that I have decided I have to have for life to be good or to be successful. Negative idols, as we call them, are things we can't experience. "This is the worst. I will never go there. I will do everything I can to keep from being in that position." When the Holy Spirit enters our heart, it's really a temple that's already filled with all sorts of things, a little pantheon. We spend the rest of our lives with the Lord cleaning the temple, which is our interior lives.

We have discovered from this Romans passage that a sign of this is when I find myself fighting for something, often way out of proportion from what would be normal, or fighting against it. We've had various friends from countries where deep in the culture is the imperative to constantly wash your hands. Hygiene to the highest level is practiced and taught from the earliest age because there's so much disease. It is protection for the family, a logical imperative.

The essence of idolatry is not religious statues. The golden calf was a representation of an idea. The bull calf at its prime (one or two years old) was powerful, and its whole objective in life is sex. It keeps getting all the cows pregnant, and that's what life is all about. That's why, when they made an idol, it was a golden calf, and they said, "Here's your God." What did they do to celebrate? A huge sex orgy. The issue is the conceptual image that whatever physical or written description expresses. It's the conceptual image behind it that's the driving force. The lusts are the logical imperatives. If this is necessary for life, I have no choice but to pursue it.

Showing a negative example: some friends feel the health of their family depends on extreme hygiene. A friend had her mother from the old country living with her, who didn't practice these habits but wanted to help with meal preparation. She said, "I'm in despair. Every day is filled with multiple times of my getting angry at my mother. I prayed about it. I hate it, but I keep doing it. It's miserable for me and my mother. I don't know what to do about it."

And so we showed her this truth about how we set up even good things as absolutes. "This must be true for life to be good". And then we fight for it, get angry, do everything we can. And she felt like she was protecting the family's health. So as we talked, she realized that her idol was, "I have to make sure that my mother practices extreme hygiene along with me so that we stay healthy." But what did the Lord say in His word? He didn't say that. She looked, thinking maybe it's in Second Hesitations or Hezekiah 12—books that don't exist. What she did find was Jesus' statement, "Honor your father and mother." She realized in the pursuit of health, she was totally ignoring what Jesus said is an absolute for honoring Him (bringing Him to another generation).

She realized she was fighting the Lord on this. She renounced the extreme drive to hygiene and welcomed the Lord's specific call to honor her mother, treating her with high regard. She entrusted the concern about health to the Lord and asked Him to protect them and show her how to welcome her mom's help without endangering them. She would handle the meat and give her mom the veggies, allowing her mom to participate without threatening the family through mishandling of meats and fishes.

A couple of months later, she said, "I'm not angry at my mom anymore. There's peace in our household. I've given this over, and it's become a lifestyle of entrusting this to the Lord. He's shown me how to honor her by enabling her to participate without causing extreme danger. Now I'm able to serve the Lord in her life in things that matter, like preparing for end-of-life matters that she wasn't available for because of this fixation." That's an example where we've realized we're fighting for or against something. Go to the Lord and ask what He says in His word explicitly about this area. Renounce the absolute that we've made out of a good thing and present ourselves to Him to pursue what He says instead. Then, together with the Lord, start making changes. The Lord can work massive change this way.

**Passivity keeps us living in the old**

Before we move on, "present" is the key word of step one. "I will present myself to the Lord, in prayer, for what He calls me to. I renounce the old and what I was driving for and give myself to His call instead." Why would you say that worry or anxiety is sin? That seems a little extreme. But understand that sin is "missing the mark." The Lord's purpose for us is to display Him. We're created in His image to manage in a way that displays Him, to relate in a way that displays Him. Anxiety blocks us from that because we're distracted elsewhere and don't hear the Lord on how to serve Him in this situation.

The example Erica just gave fits right in with Philippians 4:4-5. It shows us what this has to do with reading scripture and benefiting from it: "Rejoice in the Lord always. Again, I will say, rejoice." My automatic reaction to verse 4 is, "Really? You're kidding. I can't do that. Nobody can do that." What has happened? Scripture has touched on something. It's hit resistance straight off. Verse 5 continues, "Cause you're forbearing to be known to all people." In the example, our friend thought, "If I forbear, my mother is going to contaminate the food. We're all going to get sick and maybe die." Erica took us through the process from our PDF summary handout "How to Change." How do we actually live according to this instruction? We identify what's blocking us from living the way Scripture teaches. In this case, it's the fear. We entrust it to the Lord because verse 5 ends, "The Lord is at hand."

How do I forbear? How do I rejoice in situations that are not a cause of joy in and of themselves? It's because of the opportunity to see the Lord at work, benefit from it, and pass that benefit to others. That was a quick example of what this is talking about.

"Be anxious for nothing, but in everything by prayer and entreaty, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God." Part of the issue is the sense that, "I have to work this out myself." No, no! That's a major idol. We all have that sense, as if we're the savior or God, and we object to being inadequate to work out all the issues in our life.

So, what do we do? Returning to the handout on Romans 6:12, "Don't let sin reign so that I continue to obey its compulsions." Passivity is a block just by itself (I continue to obey its compulsions). We're talking about all of the compulsions that are part of my life. Most are unconscious, "That's just the way it's done. That's just the way I do it." I don't even realize that I'm compelled to do this. It's just the natural thing to do as far as I'm concerned. That includes working all these things out myself. If I'm passive, these blocks from the compulsions are going to continue to be there, will continue to control my life, and block me from obeying what God says in His word. I need to change that.

**Imperatives 3 and 4 (Step 1): Presenting our members as weapons of righteousness (Romans 6:13)**

"Do not continue to present the members of your body [make them available], to sin as weapons of unrighteousness." Almost all translations will say instruments or agents, and that's true, but it misses the point. The point is: This is warfare. This is not just activity. When we let sin, when we let the conceptual images of what is life, what is threatening to life that are not from God and His word, when we let them control us, we are allowing ourselves passively to fight against God, whose objective is to bring life to this world. But I'm fighting off the life that He offers.

Instead, because not only are these things all built up to this point, but the temptation to add more is right there all the time. Two things: 1) "Present yourselves to God as ones living from having been dead." I'm now responsive to God and I have God's resources. 2) "Present the members of your body to God as weapons of [that is to fight for] righteousness.

How do I do that? I determine to fight for what God calls me to instead of fighting for other things and thereby fighting against the life that God is calling me to. What is my will? What is my objective, not just overall, but in all the big and little areas of life? This is the first thing that has to change. Otherwise, "Don't do this; do that" isn't going to get anywhere because, "I can't do this because I have to do something else."

It may seem strange to think that we could be a weapon of unrighteousness, but we are. There have been many who recognized this. We had a friend who was a pastor who recognized that, on Sunday morning, if he did not give himself, present himself and his mouth and his mind to the Lord to be an agent of the Lord's patience and kindness while getting the family ready for church, that his mouth would become a weapon of destruction as he was yelling at people to get their stuff and get out the door so they could go to church on time. He recognized what a deadly weapon his mouth could be, his mind and then his mouth.

Instead, we must renounce the drive that our reputation is on the line and that's the most important thing, more important than showing the Lord to our family. Instead of yelling to ensure we're there before the service starts, we should present ourselves to work with the family with patience and kindness, honoring those who are putting on the service by arriving early. This makes all the difference between being a weapon of unrighteousness or a weapon of the Lord to further His kingdom. We have the choice all the time in specific areas.

The church, by and large, has the mentality that we're under attack. The church beleaguered is supposed to be the church triumphant. We think we're all on the defensive. No, the Lord's called us to be on the offensive for good, to fight to set people free from the sin that destroys them and their relationships with others.

**Imperative 5: take action when the opportunity arises (Romans 6:19)**

The second step is doing things the way God does them. Start right in Genesis 1. God first establishes and declares an objective, a deliberate, intentional purpose. "Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness." He then proceeds to make that happen, fulfilling that purpose in practice. Then, He offers the resultant blessing to the intended beneficiaries. That's what the three steps of change are about. We are called to do and live as God does.

The first step of change is altering our objective, our purpose, and accepting God's calling to purpose in place of the distorted ones we have in place already. The second step is making that happen, pursuing that objective in practice, looking proactively for opportunities to do the new. It's not sitting around waiting. Imagine a military unit that enlists but doesn't act. After Pearl Harbor, men flocked to recruiting offices to enlist and fight. What if they just committed their allegiance without action? How far would we have gone in defeating Hitler and the Japanese aggression in World War II? They had to act on it. And that's what we need to do just as God doesn't just say, "I want to make human beings and I want to bless them," and then stop.

The flesh, the naturally sinful nature we still have isn't our nature anymore. It's not who I am. It's who I was. But it's all still inside. This is a gift from God because He doesn't just want me to say, "Okay, I've changed my mind and bingo, I'm totally changed right now." No, He said, "I want you to participate in the process of making My objective a reality. I created you to be like Me, to be like God, and now I want you to learn about being like God in practice."

What's the flesh's second line of defense? Habits. We naturally just do according to the routines that we have established. And we've had reasons for adopting those. They may have been good reasons, they may have been bad reasons, but we don't stop and think everything through. You get up in the morning, and in many, if not most households, coffee is the first thing. You don't sit down every day and say, "Oh, I want coffee. My wife wants coffee." You just stagger out to the kitchen. You haven't had the coffee yet, so you're only half awake. You know where the coffee is, where the brewing equipment is, where the coffee cups are, and you just go through the routine. You don't really think about it, except just to monitor you're actually doing it.

If we're passive, we will just keep going through the old routine with the same old results. We have to move actively to change to a new routine. Instead, in the fifth imperative verb from Romans on the PDF handout, "Present your members as servants to righteousness." That means don't just do it in theory; do it in practice. The members is a reference to the members of your body. Put yourself there physically. Make use of your physical abilities to make it happen. "Present your members as servants to righteousness unto [its outcome] sanctification." That is, become God's faithful, obedient servant, fulfilling our commission to rule from Genesis 1, managing the affairs of life the way God does.

**Romans 7:6, 23-25 (The Rebellion Factor)**

Now I change from the routines that fail to the routines that succeed. God tells us about how to do that. But somehow it doesn't work. Why not? We hit the second resistance, which is the rebellion factor, "Nobody tells me what to do or not do. I'm born to rule. I know it." Every human being knows it. Are we right? Yes. God said, "Make human beings in our likeness. And let them rule." The perception is right. But a problem comes up. How does God rule? He does things His way. So, "I will rule by doing things my way." Now we have a problem. If I'm determined to do things my way, then if you tell me to do things a different way, I will not. If you tell me to stop doing things the way I've done them, the natural response inside me is to not listen. This is not from the Holy Spirit. This is from the sin which is still in this body and will be as long as this body lives. That's not going to be solved until this body dies and I receive a new body which is not indwelt by sin. My new body will naturally, supernaturally, by its nature, gladly obey God and will do these things that I now want to do.

**Romans 7:6; 8:10-11, 13-14 (Serve in Newness of the Spirit)**

The problem is, if I serve in "oldness of the letter" (Romans 7:6), that is, "Tell me what to do and I will do it" then it will fail because of this barrier within. How do I get out of that? I "serve in newness of the Spirit." The Spirit does not focus on the rules. The Spirit focuses on being a child of God and particularly a son of God. When we come to the Lord, we receive the new life. We receive life from our Heavenly Father. We become a child of God. [By the way, that is by birth. You are a child of God by birth.] God has given you His life and you have His life. You've been born into the family of God, but that doesn't make you a son of God right away. The term "son" is used here not merely to refer to a male human being or a male child. It is a son in the sense of having arrived at the maturity to take serious responsibility for the Father's affairs.

The motivation is to become like my Heavenly Father, to please Him by serving responsibly in carrying forth the affairs of His purpose and agenda for life, which is ultimately to share His life, to share the life of God, and to share His love and everything that goes with it: joy, peace, patience, everything else, the fruit of the Spirit, for example, and to further that.

If I focus on becoming like my Heavenly Father and like my Lord Jesus and pleasing them by blessing others, it will happen. If I think I have to do this because God says I have to do it, I am awakening the resistance of the flesh. But I bypass that by going straight to God and counting on the power of the Holy Spirit within me to reproduce God's life in me.

**Imperative 6: Do not be comformed to the pattern of the world (Romans 12:2)**

The third factor is fulfilling the change in terms of my own individual life. We notice an interesting thing in Genesis 1. In the first three days, the third day has two parts. In the second set of three days, the third (or sixth) day has two parts. And that's true here, too. There's an overlap at the end of Romans 8, which is talking about accomplishing this change internally. I'm turning from living, simply to living righteously in practice. But it's still an individual matter. It needs to go beyond just the direct benefit to me.

That's what step three is: In relation to others, to yield up, to renounce my natural self-interest focus, to embrace God's focus on being interested for the true well-being of others. This is the "present your bodies" in Romans 12:1 "Present your bodies as a sacrifice, living, holy, well-pleasing to God as your logical service." Jesus has called us to love one another as He has loved us and does love us and will always love us. The verb there is timeless. And so I do that.

There is an attack that comes from without, and that's what Romans 12:2 addresses: "Do not be conformed to the outward fashion of this age." Why outward? The outward is not stated in words. It's the implications of the kind of change this is talking about. Don't let the world squeeze you into its mold. You are not, as Jesus says, "in this world, but not of this world." You are not the same as the unbelievers who are trying to do their own thing and are pursuing lives that are not pleasing to God because it's all self-interest.

The danger is like the 75-80 mile an hour parking lots in the L.A. Basin. You seem to be in a virtually fixed position relative to the cars around you, just going with the flow. You almost don't feel like you're going. However, the asphalt is going by underneath you at 130-140 feet a second. You are going somewhere, and you're going somewhere very fast. But you're not really conscious of that because relatively, you're just part of the crowd.

That's the real danger. Even though we are new creatures in Christ, there's lots of pressure, social pressure, to act like the unbelievers and to want to fit in. We don't want to be weird. We want to look good. We even get tempted to conform outwardly to the unbelievers around us with the idea that that will cause them to like us and we'll be able to lead them to Christ. That is a deception.

**Imperative 7: Be transformed by the renewal of your mind (Romans 12:2)**

Instead, we're to "be transformed." This is to be changed in reality, to be changed in who you are. And do it "by the renewal of your mind [to glorify God visibly in your body], in order for you to prove [by the life that you live, to prove] what the will of God is [by living out that which is] good in its effect, well-pleasing, and mature."

Now when people look at me, regarding whatever this issue is that I've been applying all this to, they see someone who is God-like in reality. It's not to gain gold stars or praise from other people. It's to show people who the God is: who made them, who loves them, and who wants to give His life to them, as He's given it to me. They don't see it perfectly in me. But any place that God has, in fact, changed my life or is in the process of changing it such that His work is visible, they see it. Hopefully, they will conclude it's an attractive option that's much better than what they've got.

**An Example of Step One: Handling Worry**

Very quickly, I want to take us through these three steps with regard to the area of worry. In step one, what am I committed to? Naturally, we're all committed to working things out ourselves. Some issue comes up. I'm concerned about it. I'm concerned about what's happening with another person or with circumstances. I don't know. I feel out of control. And that's scary. So I go to work through my mind to try to solve it as if I'm a savior. But I'm not. Praise God. The Lord is here and He's the Savior.

Remember, in John 15:16, He says, "You did not choose me. I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit and that your fruit should remain." He's saying we're here to serve Him and serve with Him, not to be out on our own trying to solve life. I'm here to serve Him. But we forget that when we get grabbed by worry about things. I think, "I've got to solve it. I've got to work it out." Instead pray, "Lord, I'm here to serve You. How do we handle this? How do I serve you in this position, in this place?"

We'll give many more examples next week, but here, this is how to go about it overall. I can renounce based on Philippians 4, "Lord, it's an imperative that You say, don't be anxious." Then instead, jump into His lap, tell Him about it with thanksgiving, entrust it to Him because He's the problem solver. I get to join with Him, but I am not the ultimate solver. He's the one in control, not me.

As I give myself to Him overall, according to my calling (who I am as a believer), "I'm here to serve You. You're the Savior. I'm not." I present myself when there are out-of-control things that I'm afraid of. I don't know what to do. I can't seem to make this other person change. Whatever it is....I can't deal with the national and international politics. I present myself to Him for His service in this area. "Lord, guide over time in how to handle this, but I am not here to solve it. I can proceed with You to think about it, pursue it in partnership, but I'm not here to do it by myself."

**Step Two: Handling Worry**

But then step two: I have my old habit. As soon as I am aware of something, I grab it and my entire mind is filled with it. I go to sleep and I'm awake at three in the morning, still trying to solve it. Jesus says, "He who gives himself to sin becomes the slave of sin." When I give myself to a particular pursuit, what I have to have or be or do for life to be good (or figure out, that's where a lot of worry comes from), then my habit is, as soon as something along those lines crops up, I'm gone. I'm just consumed by that thing.

Now, I get to, proactively with the Lord, change that habit so that I'm presenting myself to Him when something crops up. I know what to do. I know the effective thing and I'm prepared to do it. I renounce letting this take over. Instead, I entrust it to Him with thanksgiving. I thank Him that He is actually here. He is Lord and He will guide me. 

I have a good forerunner in Jesus. Remember, He would get up early every morning and seek the Father for His wisdom, "How do I handle the day?" We see that at the end of Mark 1, where it's an incredible day. It's exhausting to read the beginning, let alone the whole day. He heals. He goes to synagogue. He heals Peter's mother-in-law. And then after sundown, the whole town shows up for healing. He heals everybody. We're exhausted halfway through.

And then in the morning, where is He? The whole town is lined up now. Word's gone out. Everybody, including from the surrounding area, is now there. Let's open the "Jesus Healing Clinic." The disciples can't find Him. We've got everything but Jesus. So they finally find Him. He's gotten up early and He is spending time with His heavenly Father, getting perspective on, "Where do we go now? There are a zillion options before Us and they're good ones. It's not that it's evil. What is in Your service?

They say, "The whole country's shown up. Let's start the healing." And He says, "No, let's go somewhere else. I've been called to preach to all of the communities, not just this one." And they leave. The key there is: "Be anxious for nothing." Don't let anything distract you, in Jesus' case, from His Heavenly Father. He models exactly this, which Erica is bringing out. He will not let even wonderful opportunities pull His attention away from listening to the Father's direction and doing what pleases Him. That's how to bless others: the purposes that He has come to fulfill because of the Father.

We have the habit of the old and it's a lawless habit." No one tells me what to do. I figured it out myself." Instead, the effective thing is, and I approach it proactively: I've given myself to go to the Lord to trust Him when things that are out of control come up instead of letting it grab me. It fills the entire screen of my mind day and night. Instead, I present myself to the Lord (the effective thing, to go to Him). "Thank You that You are just as much here as I am, even more so. You are good and You're in control. You're my Good Shepherd, I present myself to You. Please, over time, guide me. How do we handle this thing? I entrust it to You, and I entrust to You where it goes, and I ask You to guide me in the ask-seek-knock process of my participation."

What I'm doing is I'm changing my lifestyle. My lifestyle before was to let things grab me, the concerns, the fears, and I'm gone. Now I'm changing my lifestyle so that those very fearful things are a stimulus to jump into the Lord's lap instead and entrust it to Him and then go with Him in the ask-seek-knock process of Matthew 7 to figure out, "How do we handle this?" in His time.

**Step Three: Handling Worry**

It says what I'm doing is I'm presenting myself, my members, my thinking, as well as my attitudes and words and actions, as a servant of righteousness. I'm His servant. I'm not desperately trying to get Him to serve me (the "heavenly bellboy"). I am going to Him, "How can I serve You in this situation where I'm out of control, but You're not?" 

And it results in sanctification, a changed lifestyle. My habit is changing from being grabbed by these things. Instead, my lifestyle is changing so that when things are scary, when they're out of control, when I don't know what to do, I jump to the Lord. And I'm proactively ready to do that.

Next week, we'll be looking at, "What are the typical areas that tend to grab us?" Each one of us has special areas where it's like a chink in your armor, where the adversary knows, "If I hit that one, you're gone." You're just going to be circling on that, trying to figure out what to do, panicked, or just gone in the "I've got to solve this" mode. We'll be looking at how to get at the core of that, disarm it, present yourself instead to what the Lord calls you to, and make that place of huge vulnerability into a place of strength. We'll be doing that next week with very specific examples.

**Review**

Here, where we're studying anxiety in general, I'm changing my approach when things seem out of control or scary. Instead of running with it, I jump to the Lord's lap with thanksgiving, entrust it to Him. I keep doing that and then ask Him, "Where are You already at work? What do we do about this? How do I serve You in this area?" I'm changing my lifestyle.

We've mentioned Romans 7:6. If I make law out of it: "I will always turn to the Lord because He tells me what to do," then I will start rebelling. It's like a diet. I may put myself on a diet, but by Friday: "I've got to celebrate, right? Because no one, including me, tells me what to do." That's the flesh. I can do what I determined to do, except I can't do it consistently because the longer I do it the more I wonder, "Do I really have a choice about this?" That's why New Year's resolutions don't work. I may do it for a while and then I've got to break it so I'm independent.

How do I do it instead of making it a law that just tempts my flesh to rebel? Instead, I'm doing it because of the relationship with the Lord who loves me. That's where Paul goes in 12:1-2. I'm doing it as an opportunity to go with my Lord and please Him. You and I have the opportunity every day to give joy to the Lord. Isn't that amazing? He manages the universe. And here we have the opportunity. With this example of anxiety, as I choose and build the habit of turning to Him rather than trying to solve it myself, I can give Him joy because now I'm going with Him and we get to partner together. There's so much that we can do when we're partnering together, when I'm part of His work instead of desperately trying to get Him to fulfill my scenario.

It becomes a joyful place. Then I'm in a position not only to give joy to the Lord in my daily life, in my approach to daily life, but I'm also in a position to bless others with Him because I'm not consumed by all these worries. That's where Paul goes in the rest of Romans 12, "How do I use my gift to bless other people as part of the Lord's work?" If I'm consumed by worry and anxiety, I'm not going to be available. I'm just trying to solve it. I'm afraid, holed up instead of available to serve (even if it's just on the phone) asking, "How can I bless today?"

We'll be getting into specifics next week. Where do each of us, where do people in general tend to get hit? It's the weak points in our armor where we can get hit with worry and we're gone because these are places of fear in our lives. Or where we're aware we're out of control and so it consumes us. We want to work this through. How do I identify what's driving that area? How do I deal with it? How do I replace it with what the Lord calls me to instead? How do I change that habit and work proactively?

I know where these things are going to come up. I can present myself ahead to the Lord to walk in Him in those areas, and then I'm prepared. I'm poised to do it when it comes up instead of thinking, "Oh my gosh, it's happened again, and I'm back to the old," which is what we tend to do if we're passive. Instead ask, "How can I bless the Lord and bless other people through this?"

**Final Example**

I'll quickly give one example to finish, and then we'll pray. The example, which I probably shared with many of you, is a year ago I was in the hospital with fluid around my heart and fluid around the lungs, which can be fatal. When you're in the hospital, you're kind of at the mercy of what they're doing: when they're injecting you with this, that, and the other thing and running you off for tests. You're totally out of control.

It would be easy for me to say, "Lord, I just want out of here. Would You please heal this thing and get me on with regular life? We've got important things to do in Your service." I could be fighting Him on this. And He was saying, "Yeah, you have important things to do in this hospital." I wanted out. I wanted to go home where I could get sleep. I wanted to be able to exercise. They wouldn't let me out till they were pretty sure it wasn't going to kill me. Their motivation was right. But I was pretty sure that my best healing was at home, not there. [Steve: So she's saying, "I'm getting out of here if it kills me" and they're saying, "That's exactly why you're not getting out of here."]

I could fight Him on it and be stewing. Of course, I was right across from the nurse's station, so it was noisy all night. They were a great crew and had a great time, but it was not conducive to sleep. I gave myself to the Lord. "Lord, thank You that I'm here. I don't know what's happening. I don't know whether You're going to take me home now, whether this life is over, whether You're planning to have me stay, how long I'll be here. It's all out of my control. Rather than fighting You on this and demanding what I think is the best scenario, I present myself to You. I'm here in Your service. I trust You for where this goes and what the implication is for Steve and our family and the ministry and all of that. I'm here available to serve You here."

We've learned that when our bodies break down, we take Jesus to the medical people. They have lives just like us with needs just like us. I was just available to bring the Lord's love to the people who were there to take care of me. The last night I was there, I connected with a beautiful traveling nurse. It was her last night there before flying back to her home in the South. She just somehow knew I was a safe person and shared with me while she was caring for me that she felt so weary and discouraged. I said, "I know the place to go when you feel that way is Jesus. He says, 'Come to Me, all you who are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke [and it's the double yoke], upon you.' "

I'm yoked up with the big guy Jesus, and I'm the little guy. "Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me." That's the word disciple. "Learn from Me [how to walk where you are], and I will give rest to your souls. For My yoke is easy and My burden is delightful."

She started out overworked, overburdened. She said it's so hard because people will light into her because they're in pain, and she's there having to treat them in ways that aren't always comfortable. She just felt so discouraged and alone. I told her this verse about where to go with that, and she was just so responsive. I asked her, "Can I pray for you?" and she said, "Oh, yes."

I got to pray for her at about 2:30 in the morning when she was in caring for me next. She told me more of her story as she was caring for me. She said, "I would just love it if we could hug each other."

I said, "We can." I jumped out of bed, tubes and all, and gave her a huge bear hug. I said, "This hug is from God. He loves you and He meant for us to meet."

She said with tears running down her cheeks, "I know that."

I asked, "Do you have a Bible?" Yes, she had her Bible online. She was going to be reading her Bible, and I gave her some places to start as she flew home to the South the next day.

She said, "I will be looking for a good church. I need Jesus."

If I had been consumed with the worries of what was going to happen to me, I would have missed that divine appointment. But because I had entrusted to the Lord where this would go, including giving Him full range, "If You're calling me home, that's terrific. If You want me to stay, that's terrific too. I'm here to serve You either way. I'm here to walk with You either way. And You're here to walk with me. I'm free, and I present myself to You to serve You in the setting You called me to serve." I was just dancing on the inside with that opportunity. I had so much joy, and I knew if nothing else, if that was the whole purpose of this, it was so worth it.

Instead of being full of worry asking, "Where's this going to go? And is there anything I can do instead?" I was free for the Lord's service, and fear was replaced with joy. That's just a little example. We'll go into more next week. And then after that, we will return to finish Philippians, looking at the issue of contentment. How do I walk in contentment, no matter what the circumstances are? How do I walk in contentment and in partnership with the Lord? And so we'll finish out Philippians.

> Let's pray. We've gone significantly overtime. Lord Jesus, thank You that You are right here, that You are at hand. We don't need to fear a distant God, a distant Shepherd, but You are right here just as much as we are. And You love to be at work. You are a God of goodness and of love. You've committed Yourself to us, to our well-being. And thank You that that includes tough times because this is a broken world, but we are never alone. We have the privilege of walking with You and serving You. May we give our minds to You and our focus to You so that we're free to be about Your business and turn to You with the burdens that we so readily pick up and carry and keep collecting more and more of through life.
>
> May we recognize and look those things in the face and go to You to the core of what's driving it and release it to You and then walk with You rather than try to solve things ourselves. Thank You that You're the ultimate problem solver and You lead us. We participate with You, not just waiting for You to do it, but free to participate with our trust in You. Thank You that then we're free to bless You each day in the midst and to bless others. Thank You, Lord, in Your name. Amen.
