> Oh Lord, thank You for the gift of being able to gather together from all over the world. Thank You that we are all family in Christ. We're part of the bride of Christ. We share the same heavenly Father. Thank you that we can gather together. And You are here in our midst. You're here wherever each one is. And we ask Lord God that you will speak to each of us tonight. Open our ears to hear You. May we listen to walk in the truth, not just fill our heads. And may we listen for others as well. Thank You that You open up a multitude of opportunities for us as we welcome and walk in the truth You give us, and then many opportunities to share it with others. Lord, speak to us tonight. Thank You for each one who is so loved by you. Use this for tremendous encouragement. 
> In your name, Amen.

**Introduction**

Welcome. We are finishing Chapter 3 tonight and getting ready to launch into 4, where we will be starting next week with dealing with anxiety, not just single instance, but lifestyle. But tonight we get to finish Chapter 3, and we, of course, encourage all of us to listen, to walk in these truths. The students were sharing last night, that this has been transforming for them. And it certainly has been for us as well. We're praying for the same for you. And we're doing a quick review of where we've been, not to settle there, but to then finish out the chapter.

The question that we're starting with as we read, is, “What can I wake up to with joy every morning? What is my purpose overarching all the to-dos that are before me?”  All of us have many to-dos of many sorts, and it's easy to get buried in that “to-do” world of doing and relating. Often, there are huge challenges. “What is the joy that I can wake up to? What's the purpose that I can wake up to every morning and be praying about, welcoming, and walking in every day?”  We have many important goals that the Lord has given us and gifting to pursue it. But this is overarching all of that and filling it.

Even better than waking up excited about caffeine. It's far better. Get connected with the Master Organic Chemist who gave us caffeine.  Like, other things. Theobromine is much better. Chocolate.

**“Not that I’ve already received it…”**

We'll start with reading the first few verses here, 3:12 through 14. This is central. This is what the Christian life is all about in capsule form. It's the outlook and the response to the outlook.

Beginning of verse 12, “Not that I've already received it”, that is, arrived at, moving beyond just righteousness and justification by faith. But verse 10 and 11 say growing to know Him, that is, knowing Him through firsthand experience (which is what that particular word for *know* implies) and the power of His resurrection. Growing to know the power of His resurrection, that is bringing us out of the practical living death, walking death of sin into the true life here and now by the Spirit and fellowship of His sufferings. 

I think we noted that Romans 8 talks about the suffering, the letting go of the enjoyment: the hollow enjoyment that we got from sin, from walking according to the flesh, to replace that with godly living in practice, righteousness in practice, from walking by the Spirit. Romans 12 brings in the additional suffering that comes not from conflict with the presence of the enemy and the adversity within our physical bodies, but that which is outside from people reacting against the presence expressed through us of the life of the Heavenly Father, the life of Christ.  Being conformed to His death in order that whatever means, I may arrive at the resurrection from the dead. That means taking every opportunity. This is not about whether I will go to my heavenly reward after this life is over, but this is about the here and now experience of resurrection from the dead. 

We come to verse 12, “Not that I've already received it.” Basically, what he's saying is it's a lifelong process. There is always more of the new life to lay hold of, supplanting the old life by subduing the flesh and ruling over our bodies and our minds and what goes on in them by the power and the leading of the Spirit in accordance with the written word. “Not that I've already received or have already become perfect, but I pursue zealously. I continue to pursue it zealously so that I may lay hold of that for which I was laid hold of by Christ Jesus.” And that's the new life.

**Zealously Pursing Our Inheritance**

This is our inheritance. There are so many questions people have about the discussion of inheritance in the New Testament. What is the inheritance? When we read through Hebrews, what is the inheritance? A friend of ours, now a seminary professor, did her PhD dissertation on the question of the inheritance in Hebrews. The inheritance is eternal life, and eternal life is not about when because *eternal* means always. It's available to us just as much now as it is later in heaven, though in the fullness in heaven. But now it's acquiring more and more of it.  Entering into greater and greater intimacy with our Heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus as we apply it, appropriate it in one area of our lives after another, and progressively growing in those areas. Then, after we've worked in various other areas, coming back to that area again and going deeper and higher into the new life, deeper into rooting out the old.  This is the key. Paul says he pursues it zealously. And why not? Because what we're pursuing is life, and what we're giving up is death, though it masquerades as life, which is why we've developed those habits.

And again, he says, "I do not”, verse 13, “reckon myself as taking hold of it already, but one thing I do, forgetting what lies behind, stretching out for what lies ahead. I zealously pursue the goal of the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus."   If you're a C.S. Lewis Narnia believer, he talks beautifully about constantly going higher up and further in. It's a very, very good description of it. We talked about this, but it's helpful as a quick review. 

**Forgetting what lies behind….**

What on earth does "forgetting what lies behind" mean? It's not that the history didn't happen. What he's been talking about before is my reliance on myself and my old resources and handling things. Everything perfectly, what I'm managing, relationships, conversations, and none of us do. We have an active adversary, the devil, the accuser (that's what *devil* means) who's there saying, “You blew it. You should have…  Why didn't you? You're no kind of Christian.” I just had someone telling us that's been going through her head as she's moving into a new ministry position. She knows where it comes from, but it's easy for those accusations to lodge (in our minds) because there's some truth in it. “I didn't handle it perfectly. I blew it here, here, and here.”  We have the devil, the adversary, and others to help point out where we blew it.

It doesn't mean to pretend that I'm perfect, but the “forgetting what lies behind” is forgetting the shame and the guilt. The Lord has paid for that. When we're focused on “How could I have done that? I should have… I shouldn't have…. “, our focus is entirely riveted on self and not on the Lord. We don't grow. We end up just groveling, trying to somehow make it right by reliving it, thinking of what else we could say, and so on. The whole focus is the past. 

It's been helpful to see that the Lord invites us forward. "There is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus, " (Romans 8:1). He invites us forward to let's grow from this. It's a call of love. “Let's turn your focus to Me, the Lord, and let's just make some traction out of this. Let's see not what you did wrong, but what could you do better in the future. How could you partner with Me and serve better? Let's make some progress in that instead of groveling and squirming in the past, which we all tend to do.” We've got an active Helper to help us do that.

This is a strong picture of “I am leaving that behind”. I have learned at times when I suddenly realize I've either done “the head down all morning and or afternoon” working on things. And I prayed at the beginning, and I've maybe prayed a little bit, but it's mostly been me pushing on stuff. Instead of beating myself up, I say, "Oh, thank You for the reminder, Lord. Thank You for the invitation to move forward with You from here. So here I am. Let's do that!” And you can move forward and work out ways to be in more active reliance and touch with Him in the midst of the doing, making progress on lifestyle things. 

**Running the Race**

Part of an image that comes through very readily, and I think this is what Paul is implying, is that of a running race. This principle applies very much: forgetting what lies behind. “How did I do in the first mile of a six-mile cross-country race? I know there's a tough course ahead. Did I not go out fast enough? Have I lost contact with the leaders? Am I struggling? Have I made it hard for myself by not going as fast as I should have? Did I go out too fast? Am I suffering because of the expenditure of energy that I really couldn't afford to expend that early in the race?” It's making it really tough to continue. “Forgetting what lies behind, stretch out for what lies ahead.” See the rest of the course as opportunity.

Another example with this is in training soccer referees, especially as you get into higher levels and work with older youth players. Save it for the shower. Referees don't always make the right call. When you realize, "I didn't make the right call there," and the game is going on, if I realize it before I restart the game, if I've stopped it and realized my call was wrong, I can correct it. But once I restart the game, I cannot. It’s imperative that I don't try to make up for it by advantaging the team that I disadvantaged. “I call a straight game from here on. Save it for the shower. Don't think about that. It's going to cut further into your performance as a referee. You're cheating the players if you try to work that over during the game because you're not going to do as good a job as you will if you just concentrate on taking advantage of the opportunities that lie ahead.”

This is powerfully true in life. The adversary tries to trip us up in the present. He also tries to ensnare us in the past. He works hard to get our attention absorbed by what is past, and what we can't change. He doesn't want us to look at the past to see what we can learn from it. He wants us to look at the past in despair. He wants us to look at the past in anything to keep us from stretching out for what lies ahead. That's his objective, to keep us from making progress at this time.

Hebrews 12 is a beautiful picture of a running race and many things to learn out of it, this “lay aside every encumbrance and the sin which so easily entangles us”, not only entangles us into temptation but entangles us into guilt and shame that keeps us from making progress. If there's one point in this passage that is absolutely key, it's to take advantage of the opportunity that is always ours: fellowship with Jesus Himself. I get to move forward with Him and do life with Him and get to know Him in the midst of the growth process. There are two who are always trying to get my attention. Jesus is with me always. "I'm with you always, even to the end of the age." The adversary tries to distract our attention from Jesus by getting caught up in focusing on the past and also tries to shame us into thinking Jesus wouldn't welcome our kind of fellowship with Him at this time.

 “I zealously pursue the goal of the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.” The goal, what's the whole point? What am I going for? And the prize, the reward from pursuing the goal diligently. The prize, what is it? The upward call of God in Christ Jesus. The goal is just to pursue that as long as I continue to live on earth. Because the more progress I make in entering into the new life and laying hold of it now, the more I am blessed and the more I am able to bless others.

**Therefore, may we, as many as are mature….**


“Therefore, may we, as many as are mature, think this way.” And this is a place where the footnotes refer to verse 12 and verse 15. This is a place where the exception in the principle that we try to follow rigorously in translating, and that is consistent translation, one for one, translate the same word in the Greek or the Hebrew the same way with the same English term every time it shows up, unless that would violate the sense of the passage. This is one of those rare instances where it's true. Some translations say, “Not that I've already received it or become perfect,” verse 12, and then verse 15, “Therefore, we as many as are perfect.” What?  I've not become perfect, but we who are perfect, “oh, I guess that's nobody. If it isn't Paul, it isn't anybody.”  Verse 12 doesn't make sense to translate it as “not that I've already received it or become mature”. He is mature. He is one of the most mature believers there's ever been at the time, and that's very much the time he's writing. This is late in his ministry. Keep this as the mentality.

Part of why we're emphasizing this is I have found going through this at this time really powerful encouragement in my own life and my own walk with the Lord.  Erica, in the teaser questions, “What's the joy we wake up to in the morning?” She's absolutely right. I'm waking up these days with a lot more of the joy of the excitement of running the race. As Paul says at the end, “I fought the good fight. I've finished the course. I've kept the faith.”  Our going through it together with the on-campus class Tuesday nights and with you, then we get the blessing of doing it twice, back-to-back. We get more out of it each time. We are being so blessed by this, and it is really helping my walk with the Lord. I'm gaining an appreciation for this part of Philippians that I never had before.

“Therefore, may we, as many as are mature, think this way.” This is maturity, not perfection: “pursuing the goal zealously.”.  “Forgetting what lies behind and stretching out for what lies ahead.” Learn from the past. Don't ignore the past totally, “you stretch out for what lies ahead”. What's included in that?

Part of it is an opportunity to learn from what lies behind. Not obsessing over it but thanking the Lord for it and for what He will show me and asking that He will show me. Then, as He shows me, take advantage of that and go for it to apply that next time around. 

Any and every situation I ever find myself in, none of it can ever block me from these goals. I can always get to know the Lord better each day. I can always grow more into His character each day. I can always see things to leave behind, and things to grow into that are part of His character, which is now mine by the Holy Spirit. I can always bring His Presence to people around me. Those things are always open to me, and no one can stop that except for me. It's an encouragement. No other person can block this. The adversary can't block it. He'll try hard to trip me up, but he can't block it. I can grow no matter what anyone else is doing. I can grow no matter what the flesh in me is doing. The flesh cannot stop the spirit any more than darkness can stop light.

“Therefore, may we, as many as are mature, think this, and if”, and the particular form of if, of the four ways of saying if in Greek, says, if as is the case. "If you think otherwise regarding anything, God will reveal that also to you.” We add in there “in His time”. His timing is perfect. So, I don't have to worry about: “Where am I not thinking the way the Lord wants me to think?”. He's really saying, “Don't go on a witch hunt for everything wrong in your life,” because again, where’s your focus? Self. Immerse yourself in the word of truth. That's the big way that the Lord shows us where we're thinking otherwise from the way we should be. I may realize, “Oh, well, this is beautiful what I'm seeing in God's word.”  “Not really experiencing that.” “I'm not doing that.” As I read that passage and dig into it and pray, I get ideas of how to enter into it, how to appropriate it, how to benefit from it myself, and use it to benefit others. 

**Paul Writes to the Corinthians who judge him harshly**

One adjunct passage that goes with this is 1 Corinthians chapter 4, verses 2 through 5. We know they were judging Paul up one side and down the other. They were just, trying to pinpoint everything that was possibly wrong with him to discredit the authority he carried. He's answering a lot of these (issues) in 1 Corinthians. Here they've been judging him. And he says, "In this case, moreover, it is required of stewards that one be found trustworthy. But to me, it's a very small thing that I should be examined by you or by any human court. In fact, I do not even examine myself.” That's a shocker. We know that later on he says to examine yourself before taking communion, but that's to say, “Lord, is there something You've been saying to me that I've been blanking out, closing my ears to, because I can just square it up with You now and move forward, cleansed and being cleansed,. 

But he's (Paul) saying, “For I don't even examine myself.”  “I don't go on a witch hunt for everything that's wrong with me. He says, “for I am conscious of nothing against myself.” He could have said “at the moment”, “yet I am not by this acquitted, but the One who examines me is the Lord.”  The Lord knows what's going on in each of us. "Therefore, do not go on passing judgment before the time, but wait until the Lord comes who will both bring to light the things hidden in the darkness and disclose the motives of men's hearts. And you're thinking, "Oh man, I'm cooked. The One Who sees what's going on in the inner recesses of my mind and so on. Here come the lightning bolts. But instead, he says, “and then each man's praise shall come to him from God.” A total surprise because the Lord sees who we are, who He has made us at the core, and He rejoices in the progress. There's praise for the progress and the trusting in Him. And the more we trust Him, the more we will trust Him and the more He can transform us.

But it’s the Lord who shows us there's an opportunity to grow here and here and here. He is the Word, and as long as we're eager to hear, He will get through. I’d prefer to be listening and growing as fast as I can and not be trying to stuff my ears so that I'm not hearing Him. 

**Marriage Example**

Erica got treated for several years to a zealous young new husband who thought that all we have to do (it'll take a year or two), all we have to do is just identify the things that are wrong, deal with them, get rid of them, and then we can roll into the wonderful life that marriage should be. Steve's a man, a detailed man, and I felt like my life was under a microscope of everything that was wrong. And he's become such a man of grace now. I was just picking away the dross so that the beauty of the gold would... Yeah, well, the trouble was there was lots of dross. But I've grown, he's grown. We've both gotten to know the Lord's grace. We've grown in lots of ways and just very thankful for that. But very thankful that He (the Lord) doesn't call us to be picking each other apart or even picking my own life apart. But just looking at Him and where I see things that I haven't grown into, asking Him to grow into it and learning how, moving forward.

> Nevertheless, let us continue to walk according to that which we've arrived at.

I love this. "Nevertheless, let us continue to walk according to that which we've arrived at.” So far, of course.  Maybe a relief to people who don't get excited about the imagery of running. Maybe you had a perverse PE teacher at some point who handed out orders to run this amount or that amount as punishment. Running should never... A lot of kids are not interested in running, but don't poison them about it by making it a punishment. Anyway, let us continue to walk. Okay, if you don’t ever get excited about running, just continue walking. I'm a walker. Steve's still a runner. She was a runner. But her body is no longer enamored of that. And it's protesting way beyond the discomfort issues. It's, you know, health issues. So she walks. And she's always been a wonderful walker.

This is saying to continue at the level that I've learned to walk with the Lord. This isn't to say, “Oh, I'm mature. I've arrived. I can just coast this.”  I'm always zealously… (And remember, Paul uses that word again and again in the early part) I’m zealously pursuing getting to know the Lord, getting to walk with Him, welcoming His transformation and not just saying, “Oh, I can just cruise now.”  When I cruise, I go backwards and I fall into old things. And why would I possibly not want to move forward today in walking more closely with the Lord and being transformed? So he’s (Paul) saying, “Keep going for it. Make it your lifestyle to zealously pursue the important goals. And don't just figure you've arrived and cruise.” I found when I cruise, it gets boring.  I get restless and I start heading in bad directions. I'd much rather have the joy of moving forward with the Lord.

**Become fellow imitators with me**

Now Paul shifts to how we can help each other with this. First of all, benefit from what's there around us. Verse 17 states, "Become fellow imitators with me, brethren, and observe those walking thus as you have an example in us.”  Well, first of all, we're imitating Christ and the life of Jesus. We do have that same life in it, but we're imitating the lifestyle. Jesus is our primary model. We're not talking about imitation stuff, artificial stuff. It's the real thing. And yes, there's the cheap imitation that's deceptive. But imitation can be a very positive thing. The notion in the early church, the imitation of Christ, was a big theme, not pretending to be Jesus, but imitation is being inspired by and following a model.

We don't use it that much that way now, but that's what Paul's talking about.  And he says, “be imitators with me.” That is imitating Jesus, taking Jesus as my model and observe those walking thus. But Paul says, it’s not just Jesus who's serves as an inspiring model, but there are mature, not perfect, but mature believers all around us. They are available to us for firsthand observation. They're available through books and talks, whether in person or online or however. We learn from the examples of others.

One question that we've asked out of this verse is, “Who do I include in my friendship group?” As believers, we're not called to be out of the world, but to be in it.  Not let it be in us…not be of it.  Am I including in my friendship circles mature believers. not just in terms of their age, but in terms, (they may be younger than you are), but are they walking with the Lord in a way that shows you, “Oh, that's what walking with Jesus looks like in this particular area,” because none of us are perfect. We’re surrounded by people where you can see, “Oh, that's what walking with the Lord can look like in this particular area” and through someone else, another area. We can be inspired by that, encouraged to move forward, get vision of how to move forward with the Lord and how to bring him to family, to friends, to community, how to grow in Him. As Steve said, that can also come through biographies. It can come through various media now. But many people are surrounded by unbelievers making it easy to lose sight of what's possible in the Lord. It can even be through a brand-new believer who knows one verse, but it's what we've forgotten. We've seen that happen with an elder sharing something. Then, a new believer comes up after the service and says, “Oh, look what I just learned.” It's exactly what the elder needed to hear. It can be even someone who's just come to the Lord, but so on fire and excited about what they've just learned and about their newfound life in the Lord. It can give vision.

The other question that this brings up is, “What are we doing in our relationships? Are we giving vision to others?” Not by preaching, but by living the life of Christ and then hopefully making people hungry to ask and giving vision to believers of how to move forward and to unbelievers of what's possible. I just had that this week. Someone I've seen frequently as I walk, an older lady from India, and we've smiled and greeted each other, and that was about it. Well, last week she stopped and told me she had massive pain across her back. I asked her, “can I pray for you?”  I don't know anything about her spiritually, but she said, “yes, please.” So right there on the street corner, I prayed for her. She wanted to talk some more. She said, I think I need to start going to a church. Do you know a good church in the area? So I mentioned a couple of them that are close to here at Stanford. Then I felt the Lord giving me the old nudge of “Exchange phone numbers and offer to take her”. So if you want to pray for Mona, I'm taking Mona to church this week. But itwas just through bringing the Lord's presence. Just on a walk. Walking is good.
You can give vision. I pray that my life, which is not perfect, in case you ever wondered, that I will be making people hungry for the Lord's life.  Even though it's imperfectly lived out, that my life would be contagious in the good sense, not COVID but Jesus.

If you need insight into what's wrong with you and how you could shape up, Psalms 119:9 says, if you translate it literally, "How can a young man cleanse his way?" I like to render it; “how can a young man clean up his act?” So many translations say, you know, “How can a young man keep his way pure?” How can you keep your way pure if it isn't pure already? Anyway, that's wishful thinking. Oh, well, they're naive. They're only 16 or 19. Even if you're married and your spouse won't tell you, just have children.  They won’t hold back.  They’re not shy about calling you on things that you might do to improve.

**Hating the Cross of Christ**

We come then to a dilemma in the church. It's the just because you're in a garage doesn't mean you're a car. You can't assume that everybody that you meet in church is a genuine believer. Some who know how to talk the talk and who seem or aren’t believers yet, at least. Some are faking it. There are people in any Christian fellowship who are drawn because Christians are such nice people to be around.  By and large, that's true. There are people who genuinely think they're Christians, but who aren't yet because they haven't yet understood the reality of what it is and not just a very good self-improvement program. He (Paul) says, “Many walk, as I have told you often, and now declare also weeping. There are ones hating the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and their glory is in their shame, the ones focusing their minds on the things that are earth.”  Now, Paul's primary focus here, and if you look at the translation we've offered you, we've glossed in that on a different level, this applies to another category. Let's start with where Paul's focus is. There are people in any church who are not believers. What is the distinguishing thing? They are hating the cross of Christ. What does that mean?  Well, we've all seen portrayals, and there's reality to it, in dealing with out in the open demonic stuff that literally a physical cross, a symbol held up in front of somebody who's seriously demonized can lead to that cowering, cringing, screaming, yelling, fighting reaction. But that's not what this is really talking about primarily. Hating the cross of Christ is determined not to let go of what I like in life. Jesus said, as is very familiar to us, “Unless a person takes up his cross daily and follows Me, he cannot be My disciple.”
We can't learn (remember a disciple is a learner). We cannot learn what true life is all about if we're unwilling to let go of anything of the natural life. And that's it. It's the refusal to follow Jesus in putting the natural life to death. Progressively, a little bit here, a little bit there, but doing it and welcoming it, and allowing the Lord to take that which we thought was life and were quite afraid of letting go of.  But because of being convinced at least to taste and try replacing it with what Jesus says is truly life that does not seem so to the flesh.

These are people who just don't want to die to the old, and that's blocking them from rising to the new.  “…whose end is destruction.” These are people who will resist God and hate God to the point where He, like Paul, weeping at having to do so, will have to destroy them ultimately, because God is determined to redeem everyone who will let Him redeem them. But ultimately, righteousness demands removing that which is adamantly unrighteous.

**Whose god is their belly**

"…whose god is their belly? People who are living for the pleasure of self-gratification. People who just love to eat, for sole reason of the pleasure (of eating) (which is real and intended by God): but, not to have it control us or keep us from other things. Food is the image here, but it's hardly the only thing. I don't need to point it out with the hyper-sexualization of our society and our interest in entertainment, media, and so forth is certainly very much this, and for many people that is their god.  That is what they are convinced will give them life, and they will not let go of it. They've got, sadly, truly, a death grip on what is not life.

""…and their glory is in their shame". People whose bragging and the image, the avatar that they want to create about themselves is that they're champions in what really displeases God. Not displeases him because He doesn't want us to enjoy life. —He does; but because He knows that it's not really life. Things that people pursue as things that are wonderful and “their glory is in their shame.”   “Hey, look at me!” Glory is that which conveys an accurate picture of the reality of something.  What gives an accurate picture of them (are the) shameful things that they have decided are wonderful. These are people who focus their minds on earthly things and not heavenly things. 

The picture is almost animal life. Their god is their belly. When I take our dog around, he is a total lovey boy. He's an environmentalist. He's absolutely devoted to cleaning up the environment--old napkins, old Kleenexes, all those tasty things in the bushes, the chicken bones that some workmen just put back in the bag and tossed it...“

Whose god is their belly”. What are they living for and fighting for? It's self-gratification. As Steve said, food's an example, but it's hardly the only one. It’s, “everything's about me and my list”. A lot of the things are good in and of themselves, but not something to make what I'm living for. I'm living for my appetites. It's my right to be fulfilled in those areas. Our culture is very good now at saying, “I have to be true to myself. I have to be authentic to myself.  It's my right to go for all the gusto I can get in this area, whatever that area is.” It may be travel. It can be, food. It can be, sex. It can be being the top of the pile in Google or wherever. It's the one who's acclaimed.  My god is my appetite. Being the world expert on something so trivial that nobody's interested in it, but you are the expert. There's nobody who knows more about it on the planet than you. 

**“…their glory is their shame"**

“…their glory is their shame.” You get that at the end of Romans 1 with that downward spiral, instead of glorifying God, showing God forth and giving thanks. Instead, there's a three-step downward spiral and we're at the bottom as a culture. "They did not see fit”, (this is Romans 1, starting in verse 28) just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God any longer. God gave them over. That's literally to hold God in knowledge anymore, to view God according to reality and give Him His place. Here it results in God gave them over to a depraved mind, a failed mind. My mind is not focused on the Lord and evaluating things by the Lord's word. Instead, it's all evaluated with regard to my feelings, my desires and my self-gratification god. 

Catch that in what Erica just said, because she was just referring to the whole of God's purpose for the mind. First of all, to allow us to comprehend revelation from Him. Then. to use it to observe things around us. Then to evaluate the things around us in terms of what God tells us about His purpose and His calling for us. So, I can look at those things to see what is available to me at this time. What opportunity is there for me to do things that further God's intent for me and for the world that I can contribute to? The failed mind is the mind that doesn't make that comparison or doesn't make it correctly. Or because it's fighting off God's revelation, doesn't have the reference point to evaluate opportunities for real life rightly. Sees God's word as interference in my rights in my life. 

"God gave them over to a depraved mind to do those things which are not proper." And then comes one of Paul's famous lists. There's not one thing on that list that is commendable, but it's throughout our society now. "Being filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, evil, full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malice, gossips, slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boastful, inventors of evil, disobedient to parents, without understanding, untrustworthy, unloving, unmerciful, although they know the ordinance of God that those who practice such things are worthy of death, they not only do the same, but give hearty approval to those who practice them." Glory in their shame. Encouraging, bragging about what they're doing, and encouraging others to do the same. So that's Paul. 

**Example of a person glorying in his shame**

Many years ago, I was walking by and overheard a conversation between a group of male students, and one of them was bragging about something he had done, which was on this list. I don't remember what it was now, but he was bragging, and the others who were not believers were shocked. And here he is bragging about it, and one of them finally said, “Weren't you afraid to do that?” And his answer was a cocky, "Well, I haven't been hit by lightning yet. “It was one of those conversations where after I'd gone on, I realized what I   could have said. “You know, the Lord would prefer to reach you and turn you to something far better and far more life-giving rather than strike you down. You want to talk?” But I didn't.

Anyway, he (Paul) says they hate the cross. If your entire focus is getting all you can out of this life, the cross makes no sense at all. To sacrifice what looks good, tastes good, feels good for what? It's very easy to despise that. We mentioned last night, we were years ago at a debate on campus years ago between a wonderful world-renowned professor who loves Jesus and a cocky, young professor who hated the cross of Jesus. He was just absolutely scornful and had one rejoinder after another about how stupid Christianity is and how stupid the whole law of God is. "Turn the other cheek, that's how you get killed. That's stupid.” He was just scoffing. There was a very large crowd of students that filled the the law school’s big auditorium. At first, they were really with the young cocky guy, but they began to watch and listen to the seasoned older professor who treated this rude guy with honor and dignity and had quiet, good, thoughtful answers instead of just scorn and scoffing. By the end, the students were more siding with the older professor and had a lot to think about and process. It was good to see.  Really good that it happened on campus. Just seeing the quiet focus on the Lord of the older professor who was quietly proclaiming His goodness. He loved the cross of Christ instead of despising it.

This is saying we're surrounded by people who live this way (those who hate the cross). They're in the church as well as outside. As Steve said, though, this is primarily talking about those who were outside who may be trying to infiltrate. There are especially in singles groups, people trying to go for the cute, nice women. But when someone has come to the Lord, you haven't changed yet, except at the core. So it’s easy to end up living this and encouraging others this way. He's saying, “just look carefully at the whole life instead of just listening to even friends who are espousing this sort of thing because they haven't grown out of it yet.”   

I will ask students at times, “What are the shows you're watching on TV.  Not that I'm a critic in saying, “Oooh, you shouldn't watch that!”  But I'm saying “What are you filling your mind with? What's the vision you're getting for what a male-female relationship should be like? Is it from the Lord or is it from Hollywood?”  Because there’s only disappointment and grief down the Hollywood way.

Some friends of ours watched films of a breadth with their kids as they got older. They would help ask the question of discernment because in film and books, you can have choices and choose how it turns out. That's why Christians initially were very against the novel as a literary form because the author could manipulate cause and effect in conformance with their imagination or the message they wanted to convey. What changed that was Uncle Tom's Cabin.  When the church saw how powerfully that book helped to end slavery, they said, “Okay it can have a redeeming social value”. That used to be the measure. Of course, Dickens was very powerful in social reform. And that used to be the question. The question about anything that was not according to solid ethical moral standards. It could be published if it had redeeming social value. That was the beginning of the slide into all-out pornography.

**Immature Believers**

Let's go back and look at who else is included in what Paul is not talking about directly. But I think it's important that we look at. If you have a copy of our translation that we've given you to see, we've put a lot of gloss in here. If it's in boldface, it's the direct translation of the biblical text. If it's not in boldface, it's a gloss, an editorial insertion. We've added this thing “for many among us, pseudo-believers.” Whether they think they're believers or whether they know they're not.  But also immature actual believers who are forgiven, genuinely believe they've come to Jesus for the forgiveness of their sins, but they haven't yet started to grow. They are walking at this point because they're still babies. They haven't learned the walk of faith yet. They haven't learned the walk of setting aside something of the flesh and replacing it with the counterpart in the spirit. They haven't learned yet.

You know, animals don't have to learn to walk. If you've been in a farm or ranching setting, and if you've watched a horse, a foal that is delivered, within 15 minutes, at the outside, that little horse is up and running around the corral or wherever it is. They don't have to learn to walk; it's innate. But why aren't human beings? If human beings are superior to the animals, why isn't that true of us? And I think the Lord's trying to tell us, “You have to learn. You have to observe models. You have to decide, “well, I'm one of them. If they can do it, I can too. And I will.””  With that determination that only a very young child has and tenacity, which is the bane of the designers of childproof caps and containers, because there are so many of them that only a child can open. How do they do it? Because of their persistence. They will not give up. They'll keep working at it until they get it open. Of course, as you get older and you don't have the strength in your wrists or whatever, you got some childproof cap on some medication and you got to open it up, give it to your grandchild and let them open it for you.

Believers who haven't started to grow yet, and we footnote at that point the parable of the wheat and the tares. The point of that is, in the immature state, it's very difficult to tell the difference between wheat and tares. Don't start ripping out what you think are tares because the roots are entangled in each other, and you'll be ripping out wheat. Don't go through the church trying to weed out the unbelievers. In the immature stage, whether there's true belief or not will become evident with maturity. The true believer will be growing towards Christ-likeness; the mature unbeliever will be growing to be more and more like the world.
We put this in here because of the caution that there will be people in the church who look like and act like unbelievers. This is just the same as there are unbelievers in the church who are doing a pretty good charade of acting like believers.

In the time we've spent in Romania, and were spending it right as things were transitioning from the Soviet era, they told us about infiltration into Christian groups. They had to meet in secret. It would take them a couple of hours for a church to assemble. They would be assembling in some grainfield way out in a remote place. This is where we're meeting tonight. They had to come very spaced out, arriving 15 minutes apart. How long does it take to get 20 people together who come with a 15-minute stagger between arrivals? It's five hours. Probably they weren't getting together with 20 people and then departing the same way. A lot of fellowship while you're waiting for others to arrive and while you're waiting for the time to depart individually.   There was the problem that the Securitate, the secret police, worked really hard to study believers and learn how to imitate them. But they found how to test. You called on the suspected unbeliever to pray. They could rattle off highfalutin, almost caricature prayers. But you could tell they were not talking to God. They were just trying to impress the listeners with their play acting.

Immature believers don't want to put to death the old practices yet. They come to the Lord because they want acceptance. You trust God by faith and you trust Him to forgive your sins. They want acceptance. They want forgiveness. 1John 1:12-14 describes this really well.  They look like they're headed for destruction. They're still very much guided by appetites of all sorts. They still think some things that are horrifying to God are wonderful. They try to brag about these things. They’re very focused on the earthly.

**Our Citizenship Is in the Heavens**

Paul goes on, “For our citizenship is in the heavens.”   The important thing is that we don't spend our time trying to judge where people are. If you want to help, just encourage growth. The genuine believer will grow eventually if you keep exposing them to the truth, praying for them and (telling them) testimony of the wonderful things the Lord is doing in your life as you respond to Him and you're learning to turn from old things to new things.

Where is our focus? "Our citizenship is in the heavens, from which we eagerly await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.”  And particularly what?" There's a lot of concern, especially among new believers, all about the second coming and the rapture with bumper stickers saying, "Caution, the driver of this vehicle may suddenly disappear when Jesus shows up without warning”. People get all obsessed about that sort of thing. And, wondering when Armageddon is going to come and who are the players and all of that sort of stuff.

"Our citizenship is in the heavens." Our focus is on orienting ourselves, identifying with where the Lord's taking us into the new life, entering into it now, not waiting. Another indicator of immaturity is that it's all about what happens after I die physically. Yes, the fullness comes then. But, as Paul said, "As many of us as are mature, think this way, forgetting what lies behind, I press on." That's not I press on waiting for the second coming. That means I press on in the opportunities to grow.

**Transformed in appearance and form**

 "Our Lord who will transform the body of our humble state to be like the form of the body of His glory." There are two different terms here, and we've seen them before. We talked about them in the beginning of chapter two with appearance and form. Very difficult to translate the comparative concepts here in English. This first term, transform the body of our humble state, that's talking about outwardly. That's talking about what is visible. And this is where Romans tells us, "Do not be conformed to this world." That is, you are a new creature in Christ. Don't let your outward behavior, conduct, words, and so forth fit in with the unbelieving world around you. Don't let the world squeeze you into its mold. You'll just be moldy. It's not the outward. It's the inward. But this is the right outward change. This is changing what is outwardly visible to be like what we become at heart, like the form. And this is the essence of the reality: to be like the body of His glory, that which perfectly expresses God-likeness. We've been created in the image of God, meaning that we are to be living displays of the reality of who God is. Jesus' body of His glory expresses that perfectly, utterly.

Colossians 1 says that it was the Father's pleasure for all the fullness to dwell in Him. All the fullness of God's life was present in Jesus in the incarnation as Jesus of Nazareth. It was all in there. Of course, it wasn't all expressed constantly. The glow, the bright light, would kill. God dwells in unapproachable light. If we got to the point of seeing who God really is, I think what that's saying is we would literally, not just figuratively, die of shame on the spot because of seeing. We would just be so despairing of ever being able to be like that, but we can become a lot like that more and more. And we will get there. Ultimately, this will be true.

But remember Jesus saying, as He departed, telling the disciples, "I am with you always, even to the end of the age." He is with us. He is with me. He's with Erica. He's with every one of you, wherever you are, whatever you're doing, whatever you're thinking, whether you are paying attention to Him or so distracted by other things that you don't even notice. And eventually, you'll come in again and say, "Oh, yes, I was leaving You completely out of my thinking."

What really Paul is talking about is the transformation that takes place: transform the body of our humble state—that's our present earthly body. He will change what it is expressing outwardly to be like the reality of perfection. With these verses, as we noted before, citizenship meant a lot to the Philippians. He was using a word that meant a huge amount to them because a lot of them were plants in Philippi from Rome and Italy. They were former soldiers who had retired there, and they were given Roman citizenship as if their children were born in Italy. All of the privileges, the allegiance, (a lot of privileges), and also responsibilities—not just in Italy, in Rome. Not all Italians are Roman citizens. It was the city-state of Rome that the citizenship was placed. That was their identity.

**Our identities**

Here he's (Paul)  saying our identities are, and reminding them that their identity are, citizens of heaven. That's where home is. That's where we belong. It's from there we represent the Lord. We represent heaven. We bring heaven to earth in the way that we live and more and more so.  He's saying, remember who you are.

He said that another place where that comes up, it's Ephesians chapter two, starting in verse 19: "So then you're no longer strangers and aliens, but your fellow citizens with the holy ones and are of God's household, having been built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the corner in whom the whole building being fitted together is growing into a holy temple in the Lord, in whom you are being built together into a dwelling of God in the spirit." He's reminding them you have a high calling, where you belong, where is home, where you derive your identity. That's from being a citizen of heaven and getting to bring heaven to earth, bringing the Lord first to transform who you are, each of us are, and then also to show Him to others.

Remember, we looked at 2 Corinthians chapter 3, the last verse: "But we all with unveiled face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into that same image from glory to glory, just as from the Lord, the Spirit."  The point of this passage, the more that I focus on the Lord and thank Him that His character now dwells within me, (the more) I get to see Him in His word. I get to see Him in mature believers and keep growing, transformed from glory to glory, showing forth the Lord wherever I walk. When I'm alone, I'm giving joy to the Lord with what's in my head. It's something that's always available, always something to grow in and more and more glory. 

We've known many for a long, long time as well as growing ourselves. There's more and more of the light and presence of the Lord and His glory showing forth in each one of you, as we've known pretty much all of you for a long time.  We see the Lord more and more in each of you. He talks about transforming what is being outwardly expressed, the body of our humble state, natural humanity in a fallen malfunctioning world, into conformity with the body of His glory by the exertion of the power that He has to subject all things to Himself. It's His power that brings this about. 

And then we come to 4.1, which is really a Janus. Janus was the Roman god of doorways, you know, New Year's Eve sort of thing. It's the end of the old year. It's the beginning of the new. A doorway is right where you're transitioning from one space to another. A Janus passage is something that has significant meaning for what precedes and significant meaning for what follows, but is the pivot point between two largely separate discourses or parts in a historical narrative.

"Therefore, my beloved brethren, I long to see my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord, my beloved." Taking advantage of the opportunity, waking up in the morning, being more excited about another day with Jesus, truly present, but not physically, everything but physically, and being more excited about that than about the smell of the coffee that will affect my body to help it be able to cooperate in my mind with what the Lord is calling me to. That's where we leave things until next week.

And just to say again, I am so glad that teaching Philippians this time around, I don't know how many times we've taught it and how many times we've studied it. How many times we've read it in our own devotions and whatever has been impactful. I've gotten so much more out of it. This section that we're just finishing and moving into the next has had a huge impact on me with the eagerness to take advantage of every opportunity to grow and realize that every day is full of them. Be encouraged, and stand firm in the Lord and go through a great week, not a perfect one but a mature one.

Let’s pray. 

> Oh Lord, thank You that You are with us. Thank You that You have made us citizens of heaven, that it's to You we belong, and You are the one Who's begun all of it. You also are our goal, and You're the One who enables it all the way in between. Lord, may each of us be encouraged looking at You more and more in your word and in mature believers around us and growing from glory to glory. More and more of your beautiful life that's now ours, your character, resident within us and showing you forth to the people in our lives. Lord, please encourage each one here and may we all give You joy as we look to you rather than ourselves and keep growing. Thank You, Lord, in your name. Amen.

