> Oh, Lord, thank you so much that you are here, wherever here is for each of us, wherever here is in the world, as well as this country. Thank you that you will never fail or forsake us, that you are right with us in every season of life. No matter what the challenges are from within, from without, you are a God of covenant love. You have committed your love, yourself to us, and we've responded to your love and your sacrificial, enormous sacrifice and continued care for us as we grow.
>
> Lord, thank you for each one here. Thank you that you know each one more than we know ourselves and that knowing everything, you love us more deeply than we can begin to grasp. Thank you for the rest of this lifetime to grasp your love and your presence more and more, to learn to partner with you and rest in you in the midst of a broken world. Thank you that even though we ourselves are so much in growth process, growing into the character you've given us by the Holy Spirit, thank you that you still give us a multitude of opportunities to display you and bring you to others.
>
> And Lord, thank you for this area of anxiety that we've been looking at. We ask, Lord, that you will keep equipping each of us, give us ears to hear and help us to understand how to take on this area that we will deal with for the rest of our lives because of the brokenness of this world. Thank you that you give us tools and ways to take charge of it rather than letting it take charge of us and to instead become stronger with You and partner with You in the midst of all the uncertainties and things that are out of our control but not Yours.
>
> Thank you, Lord, in Your name. Amen.

**Introduction**

Thank you for your prayers and patience. As you know, this is our last of four sessions that we've been focusing on how to reign over anxiety. We have come to realize in the last weeks that this is a major form of spiritual attack from the adversary of the Lord who attacks us, His people. He can't have us, but he tries to derail us, deflect us from our focus on the Lord. Then we're just not very useful.

We know that we're in a broken world, and we will have a lifetime of reasons to get concerned, anxious, worry, whatever the nice or not so nice term is that you use. We all have our pet terms. "Oh, I don't worry. I just get concerned." But wherever the concerns grab us and fill the screen of our minds and attention, it's very difficult to see the Lord in the midst. We may be crying out help prayers, but the Lord can seem so small and the issue is so huge as we've looked at.

As we went through Philippians 4, we want to flip the telescope so that we see how mighty and loving and involved our God is. In that perspective, the one who created the universe and manages it is infinitely able and committed to joining with us, letting us join with Him as we deal with the many issues where we're not in control. We want to be, we try to be, and we're not. But we get to partner with the one who is.

Tonight is our final time. The way that we want to use it, and that we did with the students last night, is to look particularly at what areas tend to grab us. What are the weak points in our armor? Because there are certain fears, certain anxieties that take over when the impetus comes up, the opportunity comes up for it. For other people, it may not be a big deal at all. There are certain ones that just when this particular type of issue arises, we go spinning, trying to solve it immediately. We may be praying help prayers, but in reality, we're trying to be the fixers, to work out what can I do about this to solve it? How can I fix it?

**Example anxiety areas**

For some people, it may be a health issue. For some people, a little twitch in their body sends them spinning because it's an area of enormous and unresolved fear in their lives. For others, it may be what's going on in the family, especially adult children making choices that we know will not lead to life, and we want to fix them. And they don't particularly appreciate that most of the time. Jesus kept saying, "He who has ears to hear, let him hear." Very often, family don't have ears to hear. We have so many good and important things we'd like to keep imparting to them, and the opportunity isn't there, or at least not now. We can end up fixated on trying to get through and actually lop off ears rather than woo ears open through trying to force our good ideas.

It's different areas for different people where we just become grabbed. We can turn to the Lord and then we're right back to it again. We're distracted, not present with other people, or we're irritable and missing all the opportunities around us because we're fixated on that one thing. So tonight, what we want to do is work with the material we've already looked at and say, "what are the tools that we've already looked at that will help us to identify what's at the core of this?" Often we don't even know why we're spinning. We've got the thing we want to fix, but we can't seem to let go. Often there's a deeper issue. Why is this so important to me? Why does this take that place?

I'll give just a few examples of this. Then I'd like to open it up if any of you have an area, either that, guarding confidentiality, you're trying to help somebody with or that is your issue or a God story where you have applied what we've looked at and look what the Lord has done. We can encourage one another as well. The Lord has shown you all strategies that we can learn from too. We want to be able to benefit from how the Lord has worked among all of us.

To begin with, it's really helpful to ask, "why is this so important to me? Why does this particular area grab me?" The encouragement actually is to ask the Lord. You can't take on all of them. One student asked last night a very good question: How do I find out where all the chinks in my armor are? Very good question. The response that I gave is don't. You will be overwhelmed. Go one step at a time. Let the Lord show you a biggie. Doesn't have to be the most important, but just a big one that can be a life-stopper for you. Ask and then work through what the Lord has, what we've been focusing on.

As you've made progress, ask the Lord to show you another. And likely the people around you will be able to tell you where to start. Or probably they already have. So it's not a big mystery usually. So ask the Lord, first of all, what area should we take on? Then present yourself to Him to do it. Because so often we just try to background it and push through because "I've got to solve this" instead of actually backing up to the Lord to deal with the overall tendency. The encouragement is to take on the tendency so that this area doesn't take me spinning.

**Anxiety area: health issues**

One example is health. As many of us are getting along in life, it's "what part of my body is not working this week?" For me, it's sciatica, major pain in one leg that makes every walk very painful. I'm a walker: I take prayer walks, I do counseling walks, and now all of it is painful. So the Lord's definitely got my attention. It would be easy for me to make this issue—because it's an important area—the be all and end all. And a lot of times people start defining their lives by whatever the current health issue is. "I'm a cancer patient". "I'm a heart patient". I'm a this, I'm a that. No, you belong to Jesus, and this body is a loner, and it's showing it. It's a good loner, but it's showing it, and it's been very helpful to start with.

**1 Peter 5:6 - humility and thanksgiving**

We looked at the end of 1 Peter chapter 5, starting in verse six, "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God that He may exalt you at the proper time, casting all your anxiety upon Him because He cares for you." The humble yourselves is really, though I would not have chosen it, thank you for this and I accept it. Thank you that you promise to raise me up through this. I will get to know you. I will get to grow. I will get to bring you in some ways to others in a way that I hadn't been able to before. Thanking Him for it.

**Ephesians 5 - always giving thanks**

We've talked about thanking Him at all times, in everything, every epistle, giving thanks for all things in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father. Ephesians 5, just before the marriage section. How do we grow in marriage while we're still growing up in practice? Part of being filled with the Spirit is always giving thanks for all things in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father. Not because it's good. He's just said the days are evil right in that context, but because the Lord is at hand, He is here to redeem. As I thank Him, I get to go with Him and am open to what He wants to teach me to free me from, as well as open to how He would use me even through this.

**Philippians 4 - rejoice always**

In Philippians 4, we start with "Rejoice always." Always? Paul is writing from prison! Always, not because it's good, but because the Lord is at hand. Thank you that you're here. You're my Redeemer. Thank you that I don't need to be afraid. I don't need to push. Let your forbearing be known to all men. I don't need to walk into the doctor's office and demand that you fix my body now. I was just with someone who was doing that in skilled nursing, and they can't do that. But she was doing her best to try to make them do it.

How do I do it? Casting all my anxiety upon Him. Or Philippians 4, instead of being anxious, which means distracted, where it just consumes me. How am I going to fix this? Who am I going to call? What treatment am I going to get? Instead, I jump into the Lord's lap. I'm entrusting all of it in prayer and supplication with thanksgiving. Thank you, Lord. This is a setting where I'll get to know You and grow in You and bring You to others. And the peace of God will guard my heart and mind in Christ Jesus from the attack of the adversary who's trying to get me consumed by what's going on.

He goes on to say, but what do I focus my mind on? I focus on the characteristics that are always there in the Lord. Righteousness, goodness. I don't have the whole list in front of me at the moment, but you can. What can I count on? Who am I trusting? I can't trust because I'm told to trust. How well do we do if someone says, "Oh, well, just trust God." And what's your response? "Right. That's so easy for you to say... It's another thing to do it". And so I need to have in view who I'm trusting in order to trust. That's why he says, where do I shift my focus? Not letting myself go back because I will tend to do that.

It's a lifestyle. Every time that anxiety area comes up, jump to the Lord's lap and entrust it. This is a lifestyle shift that I'm making. What's the effective thing to do when things are out of my control? Not try to figure it out myself, but to entrust it, keep entrusting it to the Lord and then get Him in focus. Who is He? What can I count on? Paul lists all these characteristics of God that I can count on. As I have that in view and thank Him for who He is and what's available to me because of His love, then I can trust Him much more easily.

"If anything were excellent, if anything worthy of praise, let your mind dwell on me." Where have I already seen God at work? I will miss that if my focus is on this single issue. I will even miss, where is He already at work in this issue? Because I'm still focused on what I want Him to do, what isn't done yet. As I start to thank Him and say, Lord, show me where You've already been at work and start thanking Him for that, I will start to see so much. If you can't find it in the area of concern, start outside of that. Where else have I seen Him at work?

We have a friend who was in massive pain after hip surgery. No pain medication would be given for hours, and her pain was ramping up. Some guy was screaming down the hall, and she was alone in her hospital room. She cried the "help, God!", prayer, and heard Him quietly encouraging her, "Start thanking Me for all the places where you've seen Me in your life." And so she did. So she started thanking Him for all the ways she'd seen Him and His goodness in her life. She said it became the most amazing moment, a time of being in the Lord's presence and seeing even so much more than she had ever seen before of how He'd been at work and she'd missed it. She said, "though I would never choose to repeat that scenario, I would never have missed it for anything because of how I saw and heard the Lord during that time".

So I turn my focus so that I have Him in view: past, present, and future. "Then the things you've heard and seen in me, practice these things and the God of peace will be with you." What does the Lord teach me through Paul about how to approach times like this? How about other mature believers around me, where I can see someone dealing with the sort of thing I'm dealing with, but a whole lot better than I am? Really showing me how can I live this, bring the Lord to this kind of a situation, and start practicing it. Then the God of peace is with me. Before it was the peace of God guarding my heart and mind. Now it's the God of peace that I get to bring to others.

With the example of health, where I am right now, with the sciatica, I ended up bumping into somebody's grandmother from the neighborhood. She could see I was limping and asked about it and was concerned. She shared that she had massive back pain and had even stopped breathing with it. She was scared. I said, may I pray for you? Could I pray for you right now? She said, oh, yes. So here, because of my issue, it opened up. Right on the busy street corner, I got to pray for this dear woman and for her back. A week later, she texted me, thanked me, and said her back was way better and God had answered my prayers. She wanted to know where she should go to a church and if I knew any good churches.

I told her about some good churches and ended up taking her to a church a couple of weeks later. It was all brand new to her. She had never been in a church before. During communion, I told her, I'll sit this out with you. I'll just sit with you in the pew. I'd explained ahead that this is for people who've given their lives to Jesus. But if you're not there yet, you want to be true to where you actually are and not do something that isn't consistent with your inner life beliefs. And so it's a good time to just think about it.

During communion, she's whispering in my ear, wanting to understand what this is all about. So I got to explain the gospel to her during communion. On the way home, she wanted to know how I'd come to Jesus. I got to tell her that. I think I clean blew her away. I'd invited her to lunch and she said, "Oh, my dogs need a walk". I think I'd overdone it a little bit. A week later, I thought, "I'll probably never hear from her again". But I prayed for her every day and then heard from her with thanksgiving for taking her and just how meaningful it was.

I had been thinking I should offer her a Bible because I was pretty sure she didn't have one. She had grown up in a Catholic parochial school and was praying the 23rd Psalm and the Lord's Prayer, the only thing she knew from the Bible. I said, "would you like a Bible? Because there's far more in there". She said, yes. Day before yesterday, I went over with her Bible and the house was full of Hindu demon statues, just completely packed with these huge statues. Just like the Buddhist temple down the block where I got to minister to a Buddhist nun and a disciple. But this one was through this sciatica.

I got to explain the gospel again. I had marked passages to start with, and she was almost like a child, so eager to start reading the Bible again. I got to share with her, and this is, again, speaking on the topic, "why does the Lord let our bodies break down?" Because we would all like, the "I come to the Lord, then take me home in my prime! Why do we need to go through all this?" The Lord's answer to Steve and me has been from 2 Corinthians 4.

**2 Corinthians 4 - hope for aging and health issues**

"Though the outer man is decaying, [it's a loner and it's not meant to last forever], the inner man is being renewed day by day. For momentary light affliction is producing for us an eternal weight of glory far beyond all comparison." He is working gold in us not because of suffering in and of itself. Some cultures worship suffering and think that somehow you gain merit by suffering and status by suffering. But this is not that. It's the growth in the Lord's character and in getting to know the Lord Himself that we get through this.

"We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal." Then he talks about the body we'll have when we're home with Him, and that's way better. Paul's answer to these health issues is he's looking where it goes for the long run. He's saying the Lord is, our bodies are a good gift from the Lord. They're awesome, but they are loners. As we get older or there's some crisis, He starts letting the strengths drop off, and we would just like to stay strong.

His encouragement is as our natural strengths drop off, as there's more pain, it's an invitation to come closer and closer with the One with whom we'll go on forever to really cultivate that close relationship with Him so that as we walk through end of life, it's almost a seamless walk where I'm learning to walk with Him now more and more and then I walk with Him right through the end of this life and right into the next. I've been now with quite a few people at that point, believers, and it can be beautiful and victorious rather than horrible, even when there's a lot of pain. I've seen just the Lord almost physically at times like that. The encouragement is as aches and pains and you know I've got rheumatoid arthritis and sciatica and various things, that it's all an invitation to walk to say "thank you, Lord. I wouldn't have chosen this, but thank you for it. I get to bring You, Jesus, to the medical people. I wouldn't have known them otherwise". How many specialists and therapists and so on that I get to bring Jesus to, and I get to know the One with whom I will go on forever.

Actually, Psalm 47 says that He is with us unto death—upon death—but actually it's a Hebrew way of saying forever. It's just that seamless walk right through, and I get to start cultivating more and more of it, of just that relationship with Him. Health issues don't need to be this massive fearful thing that takes over. It's instead just one more opportunity to rely more on the Lord and still to be available to how He could use me.

We feel like we're losing agency. We're losing control. We're losing freedom of choice. But I am never in a position where I can't serve with the Lord. Even if I'm flat on my back, I can pray and be a powerful force in this world. Now with these other physical issues, the Lord's using it as an open door to people in the neighborhood.

**Opportunities to come alongside in the midst of health issues**

This dear lady was so pleased. She said, I've had rotator cuff surgery. And I said, well, you know what? So have I. We were really bonding over all the surgery and rheumatoid arthritis. We had quite a few in parallel. She felt like she'd connected with someone who understood, but also knew how to walk with the Lord. She said, I've been trying Hindi prayers and sayings, and it just doesn't bring comfort. It doesn't bring courage. But the Psalm 23 and the Lord's Prayer do. And so she just trembling with excitement to start reading her Bible.

Instead of grousing about it and being bitter or angry, just saying, "okay, thank you, Lord". Yes, I'm asking for healing every day. Of course, I am. But as long as You choose to have this continue, I'm available to serve you in the midst of it. And I want to know you and grow in you. And then the Lord and I have victory over that area. We're reigning over it instead of letting it reign over us.

That's an example in the health sector, which I know all of us deal with at different times and will more and more. It's opening up the door to be alongside a friend who's right at the end of life right now and getting to walk with her and bring Scripture and prayer with understanding and love and hugs and just be the hands of Jesus, the arms of Jesus.

I may have told you, we were in one of Hannah's nursing classes at Point Loma, spiritual aspects of nursing. It's the true story of a young nurse who was caring for someone with a horrible skin disease. The guy had to be in isolation. You had to suit up totally to do anything for him. She was out charting, and her supervisor came by and then came back later and was startled to see this young nurse had suited up again and was sitting, holding the patient's hand. She came out, and she said, you didn't need to care for him at that point. What is this? She said, "well, I was sitting here praying for my patient. And I looked up and I was startled to see Jesus sitting there holding his hand. But I knew he couldn't tell that that was true and that I needed to go in there and hold his hand so that he would know Jesus was there holding his hand".

That's what we get to do. A lot of times, it's the struggles and the disabilities that give us the compassion and sensitivity to what others are going through and the ability to come alongside as the Lord nudges us and the bridge of understanding to be able and going to the Lord ourselves for what are your answers to me that then I have to share with others. These very areas of worry that can consume us, we have the opportunity to turn into a place of reigning with the Lord, a place of strength, and a place of partnership with Him.

**Anxiety from idolatry**

These are some examples in the health sector. We have also looked at the issue of how to change many times and from Romans. What's identified first is what Scripture calls idolatry, but it's really conceptual images where we have decided, often unconsciously, that something has to be for life to be good or negative ones can't be for life to be good. What I have to be to be successful can't be if I'm going to be successful, have to experience or not experience. Those things can run us.

Another area, if you have a pet area of anxiety that tends to grab you, is to ask the Lord, are there some idols that are driving this? As a believer, it's often good things that I have made an absolute instead of, if the Lord wills, please encourage, please enable this, like health, please enable it. But I've made it what has to be for life to be good. And those lead to so much stress and anxiety.

**Practical examples!**

The students and young professionals last night, various ones have been in work situations in high-powered tech companies where there's mean-spirited competition and ultra-critical approach where someone is very nit picky about exactly how things are presented. It becomes a place of pride, competition, and criticism to show that I'm better than you. When that's going on, we want to rise to the occasion and show them where they're not doing things right. Instead of diffusing it, we add to the problem. You can stew over it at two in the morning and on the weekends. How am I going to solve this so that I make them stop and so that I end up on top?

It's easy to just run with that. "Here I am trying to serve You in the workplace, God. Look what I have to deal with now!" Instead, again, starting with thanksgiving: "Lord, I wouldn't have chosen this, but the company is full of real people like me. No matter what they do, I have the freedom to choose my own approach". It's very easy to feel like I'm out of control. I can't stop them. I might end up with lower ratings, and that might affect how long I'm there, all sorts of things. The fear factor can really jump in as well as the justice. This is not right. It's easy to pray, but not really to pray God-help prayers, but still keep it myself rather than going back to say, Lord, what do you say about this? I'm here to show You forth at work. I've kind of forgotten that. I think I'm there to show me forth. What's driving this? Often there are multiple idols, multiple conceptual images that are such a given, they're under the radar, but they're driving my response. One might be the perfectionism and the "I need to be on top". That can be cultural as well as just the perfectionism of someone who has a lot of ability and training and tends to want to go for the top. I want to go as far as I can. We make an absolute of it. Now it's threatened by somebody else who's doing the same thing. I can't seem to stop them, and the boss doesn't seem to see it, or if he does or she does, it's not something that they're planning to step in on. In fact, some companies use that kind of competition to try to get the best out of employees. I've had students in tears from summer internships like that.

So I go to the Lord, and what's the freedom? What's the out? First of all, what's the Lord's calling in the work sector? Is it to be the top and the best with everybody else? Excellence is a good thing. It's a very good thing. But Colossians 3 really helps to define what I'm there for. Colossians 3:17, "Whatever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks through him to God the Father." First of all, I'm there to do it in His character. I get to bring Jesus, because doing it in His name means in His character. Hebrew names are the essence of the character of that being or animal or whatever it is. I get to bring You, Jesus. That's my purpose in this work setting, not to be the star of the show and get the huge raise and the huge promotion. I'm there to show You forth. Thank you that I'm here, even though there's a lot that I didn't bank on, I didn't count on. It's a lot different than what I thought it would be.

Starting at Colossians 3:22, "slaves [and that was half of the workforce for the Roman Empire. No chance of changing companies unless your master got rid of you...] "Slaves, in all things obey those who are your masters on earth, not with eye service, those who merely please men, but with sincerity of heart, fearing the Lord. Whatever you do, do your work from the soul as for the Lord, rather than for men, knowing that from the Lord, you will receive the reward of the inheritance. It's the Lord Christ whom you serve." That gives me a freedom to be there. Does the Lord want excellence? Yes, but it's to Him. It's not for the promotion. It's not for an added raise. I get to go all out in serving, understanding the goal of the company or the group I'm in and contributing my gifting to further that as long as it's fine with the Lord. It's not cheating the FDA or something like that. We've had people who found out they were hired to change testing data so that they could get their product through the FDA. And they had to say, I'm sorry, you moved me all the way across the country to take this job, but you're asking me to do something I cannot do. So you need to release me and pay me to move. Of course, they will give you a very good severance because they don't want you to blow the whistle to the FDA. Then you have to decide what to do about that.

I have the privilege of giving myself to serve the Lord there, to do excellent work with the gifting I've got, to further what the company or the group is seeking to do, as long as it's fine with the Lord. And then my reward is from the Lord. It's up to Him how that goes. And I get to bring Him to the people, including those who were the nasty climb up at the expense of everybody else.

If somebody is ultra picky and nitpicking, if they're over me, okay, thank you, Lord. If you want me to put in the time to finesse this thing to your style, okay, thank you, Lord. That's what we get to do. You may be able to say after cooperating fully, I could use my time better to further your cause if we weren't quite so picky about the way it's presented. But you want to prove that you're fully in.

**Forgiveness**

We've had students whose bottom line was, I must be treated fairly. They cannot hold a job, or live with anybody. Some have ended up on the street because it's such an absolute. And so instead, "thank You, Lord, that I am treated with dignity from You. I have the freedom to serve You even in unfair and unjust situations. I can be free from that, but I need to work out the justice issue by forgiveness."

Forgiveness is releasing the offense factor. I'm releasing it to the Lord instead of trying to work it out, make it right, make it just, which often we can't. And who's defining what's just here? A lot of times we have different definitions of what's just and right. Like the two kids who are in a brawl and the mother says, who started it? She did. She hit me back. We all can see what the other person has done. That just keeps spiraling instead of stepping out of it through releasing the offense factor as a lifestyle, because it will happen again.

Then, Lord, how can I serve You? How can I show You here? It doesn't mean you have to be a doormat, but certainly at the moment, forgiveness enables you to keep serving. If you're seeing a long-term pattern with people that you have long-term relationships with, you may be able to bring it up at a time apart from an incident. I'm saying this seems to be the pattern. Can we work out a better way to cooperate together?

**We always have agency!**

Identifying what are those givens that I'm fighting for is half of dealing with the anxiety. If I'm fighting for it, I am tense. I get angry or try to push in, or I get depressed because it doesn't seem like it's going to happen. All of those are signs of at least one, probably a number of idols that are feeding into this thing. As I recognize them and renounce, I don't have to be the top, the best here. Instead, replace it with what does the Lord call me to instead? I present myself to be here to serve You, to bring Your character, love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, gentleness, faithfulness, being under the control of the Spirit: I can always do that no matter what other people are doing. Paul was chained to the guards. He was showing Jesus to them as well as talking, as well as answering questions. "You're different from other prisoners. What's with you?"

We always have agency. We're never helpless. I always am able to bring the Lord to the people I do have contact with.

**More examples!**

I want to change maybe a sister-in-law or a parent or one of the adult children or all of them. Those ears may be closed at the moment. So what can I do, especially where it impinges on me? I get to release the offense factor. I get to pray for them. Jesus says, "Pray for those who persecute you." Persecute doesn't just mean throwing rocks. It can also mean just driving away. They're putting up a wall. I can pray right through that wall. I can love through that wall. Where are their ears open? Where are they open to being loved with the Lord's love? They may not be open to hearing anything, but love is what opens ears if they're ever going to open. And prayer. I have so much I can do if I haven't determined that I have to be the one to get through. Often I will pray with someone whose ears are closed, "Lord, bring other believers into their lives who will love them that they could listen to." Oftentimes parents are the last ones. We've shot our wad, and they've decided how much to take, and they've closed their ears to the rest. And if they're loving and serving, that may open.

Our kids now are asking questions at times, and we're very careful to answer short and see if they want more instead of, now that you've asked, unload the whole cow. It's really learning to rest in and partner with the Lord and saying, "Lord, where have I decided that?" Made an absolute of where things have to be. And instead, what do you say? I renounce that. Is it an absolute? No. The absolute is, or what I have agency over is, what do I get to contribute? And then let the Lord take it from there.

Those are some examples. Be proactive, prepare ahead. If you have dealt with some area like a relationship issue with your adult kids or growing kids, you know where this is going to come up again. These are usually repeat issues.

We've known some men where the thing that just sends them into orbit is pushy, controlling women. They just come unglued with that because they grew up with a pushy, controlling mom. Being able to go back and say, "Thank you, Lord, for mom. I forgive her. And thank you that I know her intent was to bless, even though it sure didn't come across that way. And thank you that oftentimes when people are pushy, it's because they're afraid. They're afraid things aren't going to go the way they need to go. And so they push. And so I can be compassionate instead of try to push back and shut them down."

We do have a former student who whenever his mom launched, he would be doing higher math in his head. He got really good at mathematics. He didn't gain too much from his mom. But anyway, you can often go back to where does this come from and what does the Lord say about it?

We had a brilliant doctor and researcher who had an absolute terror of elevators. And he got stuck in one once and just started to panic. And here he is, a top scientific researcher. And he knows the science. He knows the door is going to open and all of that. But, he's just panicking. And he thought, "What's behind this? Why is this absolutely frightening to me?" Well, it turned out when he was growing up, if his mom got really angry and he had disobeyed, she would lock him in the basement until his father came home to administer justice. And so for him, that was a terrifying experience of being boxed in. Once he realized where that fear came from, he could release it to the Lord. "Thank you, that I'm not going to be in that situation again. Thank you that mom was doing the best she knew how."

So he knew, but it turned into a terror. And instead, thanking the Lord that this is totally different and that the Lord is with him, even if he's in a very small, dark place. And then he could be fine.

These are some examples. We're right at the end of our time. I will pray.

Next time, we are finishing Philippians with the issue of how can I actually cultivate contentment, true contentment, not just being okay or just putting up with circumstances, but real life contentment in the midst of any circumstance because that''s where Paul goes, and there's a lot to it.

> Oh Lord, thank you. Thank you that you know where we live in our heads, what takes off in particular situations in our lives that can absolutely grab us. And then we start grabbing other people or just being absent.
>
> And Lord, we ask for every one of us that you will be showing us one or two big areas where we can really go directly to you and go to the core of it. What is it I'm actually afraid of? What is it that I actually feel like has to happen for life to be good or can't happen? And Lord, may we instead find out from you and your word what to replace that with and do so overall and then look for opportunities to walk it out in practice and be available to serve you in other areas and other people around us rather than being single-focused on the issue. Thank you that we have a lifetime of opportunities to bless with you. Thank you, Lord, in your name. Amen.
