The true story of the first Thanksgiving is an amazing demonstration of the
Lord's love and faithfulness to people undergoing great suffering and loss in
their quest for religious freedom — a fascinating story that few Americans know
and a wonderful account of a long chapter of beautifully positive relations
between European immigrants and the native Americans.

Erica has been researching this history in depth over the past several decades
and has told it to hundreds of students who have celebrated Thanksgiving with us
in our home.

This was recorded on Zoom during Covid shelter-in for the Stanford Biblical
Counseling Course. You might enjoy it as a "welcome back to class" experience
and perhaps listen to it with others over Thanksgiving dessert which is when
Erica tells it every year.

> Lord Jesus, thank you so much that you are King of Kings and Lord of Lords and that you reign above all rule and authority and power and dominion and every name that's named. And we're so thankful for that.
>
> Looking back in history, we're so thankful that you are the one who brings peace, who brings order, and purpose. And, Lord, we thank you for this Thanksgiving story that is Your story.
>
> And we ask, Lord God, that You will open our ears to hear you and our eyes to see you. And that you will use this story for great encouragement for all of us, both those of us who know it in detail and those for whom parts of it are new.
>
> Thank you for this group of dear believers, all of whom we know and love. We ask for Your special encouragement for every single one. Thank You that we get to carry this story of thanksgiving to You wherever we will be celebrating Thanksgiving this year.
>
> And Lord, please protect everyone from COVID and strengthen us to strengthen others and to bring the hope of your presence to those around us. Thank you, Lord, in your name.
>
> Amen.

It is a joy to be together and get to share in this rich story of Thanksgiving. It's a story that I have researched for many years since our girls were little and we were homeschooling. We felt it was important for them to know the story. The more I research it every year, the more amazed I am. It is God's story.

Many of you know this story much more than others. Nowadays, most Americans only know the rudiments of it. They talk about Turkey Day or Thanksgiving, but Thanksgiving to whom? They have no idea.

And probably most or all of you do know who to thank. You probably know a lot of details of this story. At the end, I will happily hear questions, additions, and corrections. I am still learning and I've been researching from lots of different sources over the years.

As we said in our announcement, it is an amazing account of God's special care for people living through great loss and change. It is a testimony to one of the few good chapters in relations between European colonists and the Native Americans.

One year we had the privilege of having several Native American brothers, Stanford students we had been working with, at our Thanksgiving table. One year we had 18 different nationalities around our table. For decades now, I have been telling this story.

You are getting the longest version yet, so I hope you've got a good cup of tea to enjoy it with. These brothers had been struggling with bitterness because of the history of dealings with their tribe and all that they had been learning at Stanford about the treatment of other tribes. They were so encouraged through this story. It provides a very relevant and helpful perspective on the challenges of our current time. Many countries celebrate harvest festivals, but the events that led to the first American Thanksgiving are unique. It didn't start with a feast, but with a small group of people who took on huge challenges and grew in great faith and endurance.

You'll see above all, it's a story of God, of His specific care and orchestration of events and people that no human being could have put together.

The story begins in England in 1607, the year Jamestown was established, the first of the English colonies in America that actually survived, barely. This story started in a little town of Scrooby, England in Nottinghamshire during the reign of James I of England.

Before this, England had blossomed through the English Renaissance with Henry VIII and Elizabeth I and such great poets and playwrights as Shakespeare and Marlowe and others. England had also been through fierce religious controversy during this time.

Henry VIII removed England from the Catholic Church because he wanted to divorce his wife. He wanted an heir, a son, and was hoping to be able to have a son through someone else. He went through quite a few in that search.

He established the Anglican Church, which was very similar to the Catholic Church with ceremonies and bishops and archbishops, just no pope. Henry the Eighth was the head of the church.

He was followed by a very short reign of his one son who died very quickly and was a Protestant, but then was followed by Bloody Mary, a Catholic who executed many Protestants in order to reestablish Catholicism.

After her, Elizabeth I, who was Anglican, acceded to the throne. She repressed Catholics because the Pope had commanded Catholics to get rid of her and reestablish Catholicism in England.

After Elizabeth, James I from Scotland, also a Protestant, came to the throne. With all of this controversy, he was in no mood for any nonconformity. In fact, during that time, throughout Europe, religions were decided from the top down. You didn't have your own individual choice. The monarch made the choice for the whole country.

In 1559, the Act of Uniformity in England was established, which said that everyone must go to the Anglican church. Any Sunday or holiday that you missed, you were fined. If you weren't in church, anyone who was trying to worship God outside of that was jailed or persecuted, and some were even killed. It was not a time when variety was welcomed or even allowed.

Into that chaos, into that highly controlled context, copies of the Bible in English started to come into the country.

And now, before we get to that, I am going to give you a quick, very quick summary of the development of the English Bible, because it is one of the main characters in our story. One of the main players, the Bible in English. For centuries, the Bible had been available only in Latin and had been confined within monasteries and with priests and clerics. Many of the priests did not even understand the Latin translation.

William Tyndale, in the early 1520s, who became known as the father of the English Bible, was a student at Oxford in Greek, Hebrew, and Latin. He was appalled at the small amount of knowledge about the Bible of many of the priests and clerics. To one cleric, he is reported to have said, "If God spare my life, and in many years past, I will cause a boy that drives a plow shall know more of the scriptures than you do."

That became his life's calling. Tyndale's vision was inspired by Luther. That vision was that every man might be empowered and illuminated by reading the Bible in his own language. Tyndale fled to Germany where he translated the New Testament and the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible, from the original languages into English.

They were printed in Cologne in 1526 and also in Antwerp and other places, then smuggled into England and became widely available. Tyndale's translation would prove to be of foundational importance to the shaping of later English translations and of English itself.

For this, he paid with his life. It is thought that certain senior English churchmen who felt their positions threatened by Tyndale's activities arranged for him to be arrested in Germany, strangled, and then his body was burned.

After several intermediate translations, Tyndale's vision was finally fulfilled through the Geneva Bible of 1560. It was produced by a group of top Greek and Hebrew scholars from Oxford who exiled in Geneva, Switzerland, home of Calvin and John Knox and other reformers.

It offered the best English translation at the time of the biblical text then available, along with copious English marginal notes, illustrations, and maps designed to allow the readers to make sense of what they read in the biblical text itself.

It was affectionately named the "Breeches Bible" because it translated Genesis 3:7. Instead of saying they made themselves loin coverings, it said that the couple put on breeches, breeches being an old term for a pair of pants. I think seeking to make it understandable and proper for the reader in English.

It was printed on the continent and then flooded England. For the first time, the common people were reading the Scriptures in their own language. People even learned to read from it. Groups would form and those who could read would teach the others so that they too could read the Scriptures in their own language.

Tyndale had said that the gospel, euangelio, is a Greek word signifying good, merry, glad, and joyful tidings that make a man's heart glad and make him sing, dance, and leap for joy. Many in England found it to be so as they read the Scriptures; they experienced a joy in the midst of normal life. The Geneva Bible also was the Bible that Shakespeare used and quoted in his plays, with the backdrop of a lot of his biblical understanding that is displayed in his plays.

Now we come to our particular story, and William Brewster was the postmaster, steward of the manor, and administrator of law and justice in the town of Scrooby, Nottinghamshire. He also collected rents for the Archbishop of York, who had enormous domains.

He was a highly educated man who had attended Cambridge, had been in the service of Queen Elizabeth, and had gone with her ambassadors on secret missions to the Low Countries, the Netherlands. He had seen Europe. He'd moved with the great ones of his day but had come back to be postmaster as his father had in this little village. He was respected by his neighbors for his wisdom and his goodness. If a neighbor was sick or in trouble and needed the help of a friend, he could find it at the hands of the postmaster of Scrooby.

Another key figure that will follow is Will Bradford, who was left as an orphan when both of his parents died. He also was very ill for quite a while. He experienced firsthand the friendship of Brewster, who would walk for two miles to spend time with this boy. He gave him a Geneva Bible and helped him with his schoolwork. It's remarkable that someone of that stature would spend time with a young boy. But they became fast friends and had many happy hours studying the word together during Bradford's recovery.

William Brewster, the postmaster, invited Mr. Richard Clifton to come and teach the Bible every Sunday at the manor. He was such a good teacher of the Bible and made it so understandable in everyday terms that people would walk long distances to hear him. The messages helped them to understand the Bible, and they went away comforted and began to read and study on their own and seek to practice the teachings.

They called themselves separatists because they wanted to separate from the official Church of England, which had a lot of corruption in it with the wealth and power that bishops and archbishops held. The separatists wanted to keep it simple in their practice like the early church: to meet together studying the scriptures, to pray and encourage each other, and reach out and care for their neighbors much as we do.

The Puritans, whom you've probably heard about, wanted to stay within the church but purify it. These were separatists who wanted the freedom to worship the Lord openly and just study His word and walk in His ways.

Under James I, such nonconformists were persecuted. The king's spies soon started to hound them, and they had to start meeting in secret. Finally, after much prayer, they decided that in order to have freedom to worship and to study the word, they must leave England. It was not easy in that time, and it was not done. Most people stayed in the same village their entire lives as their father and grandfather and everyone else had done. If you tried to leave, you needed to get permission from the government to take any goods or money out, and they knew they would never get that permission.

Trying to keep it a secret, they sold their land and put all the women and children on a barge to float down a river. The men hiked 50 miles over land to meet the women at the sea. There they were to board a Dutch ship that they had contracted with.

They actually all arrived there, and the Dutch ship was there and came in, but the women's barge was grounded because the tide was out and wouldn't be able to float to the ship for hours. The ship sent out the boat, and the men boarded to load the luggage in and then come.

Yet while the men were on board, suddenly the captain ordered the sails to be raised and the ship started to leave. They had sighted soldiers and the pikes of soldiers coming over the marshes. It had been naive to think that that many people could escape unnoticed.

A very unhappy group of women and children were arrested by soldiers, the King's men, marched into the nearest town, and provided a real puzzle for the authorities. They couldn't send them back home because they had sold their homes. If they jailed them, it would add to everyone's sympathies that were growing for the separatists.

Finally, these women and children were enabled to make the crossing to Holland, where there was freedom of religion.

Meanwhile, the men in the ship were blown by a gale across the North Sea and ended up near the shores of Norway. Everyone had given up the ship as lost, but they finally made it back to Holland and everyone was reunited. That was considered a great miracle of God.

They settled in Leyden for about 12 years, and those were peaceful years. Brewster taught in the university there. Many of them found work as clerks or in fabric mills and as tailors.

At the end of the 12 years, they began to realize that this could not last. England was as powerful in Holland as it was in England because England protected Holland from Spain. They actually shut down a press that Brewster had started to spread religious tracts back into England, and it was promptly shut down by the authorities.

Also, the treaty with the Spanish was about to be over, and everyone knew that this quiet, peaceful place would soon become a war zone. Their children were growing up Dutch. They were speaking Dutch. They were marrying Dutch and soon would be absorbed into the Dutch culture. Though their first priority was absolutely we belong to Jesus, their second priority was we are English. They prayed about what to do and whether they needed to move on. And I want to invite you all to think about living this because that really brings home the power of the story and the power of what God did, the challenges they lived through, and helps to encourage us as we deal with the challenges of our days and our lives, including the upswing of COVID.

They started to consider: should they establish a colony in the new world?

Stories from Jamestown had started to come back, both with the promise of a new land, but also wild, exaggerated stories about savages skinning you alive, boiling you for meals, and lots of other exaggerations told around the fire at night.

And so, the decision was huge. The dangers were huge. During that time, some husbands and wives were divided over what to do.

The men were catching the vision of establishing a new land where people could come to worship God freely. The women were thinking about what about our children? What about safety? What about our friends that we would have to leave? For what? And could we even survive? And besides, we don't have the money for it.

So Bradford wrote his answer to these very real fears. And these are words that are of encouragement to us today too. He said:

"All great and honorable actions are accompanied with great difficulties and must be born both enterprised and overcome with answerable courages. It was granted the dangers were great, but not desperate. The difficulties were many, but not invincible. For though there were many of them likely, yet they were not certain. It might be that sundry of the things feared might never befall. Others, by provident care and the use of good means, might in a great measure be prevented. And all of them, through the help of God, by fortitude and patience, might either be born or overcome."

The words glowed with faith and vision and unbeatable courage to build a brave, free world.

As always, before a great decision, there was a day of prayer by the congregation. When the vote was taken according to their democratic custom, the majority were for going to the new world, for moving on, for the great adventures.

So they were able to contract with a group of English merchant adventurers who promised to provide them with a ship and to send supplies for the colony if they, the separatists, would agree that for seven years they would work four days a week for the merchants, two days a week for themselves, and one day was the day of worship and rest.

The ships that arrived with supplies were to be sent back with fish, furs, lumber, and anything the merchants might make a profit off of.

They agreed to that. They took those who were going on the Speedwell, a ship from Holland, and met the ship the Mayflower in New Hampton just as they were ready to sail. The merchants came demanding new terms: instead of working four days a week for us, you can work six days a week for us, and at the end of seven years, we, the merchants, get everything, but you're there and you can start over.

Basically proposing demanding slavery for seven years in the New World.

The pilgrims, as they now call themselves, refused to change the contract. They sold all of their butter and other supplies they thought they could do without, paid the port fees, and then finally sailed out.

After they were out not very far, the Speedwell started to send up distress signals. It was starting to take in so much water that they had to go back.

Then after repairs, they left again. And 300 miles out, the Speedwell again sent up distress signals and was shipping water so fast they had to go back.

Think about it, such heartbreak. And they think that actually the captain and the crew of the Speedwell did not actually want to make the trip and had sabotaged the ship themselves because later on the Speedwell was repaired and was totally seaworthy for many years of merchant service.

But they didn't know that then.

They were now at Plymouth, and they recombined. Some were discouraged and left and stayed in England.

They recombined on the Mayflower and crammed 102 people onto the Mayflower, a very small ship.

I don't know if any of you have been to the historical reconstruction of Plymouth in the New World and the Mayflower II, which was built as a replica. We took our girls there as part of homeschooling, and we were shocked at how small the Mayflower was.

They crammed 102 passengers with all their gear below decks, under the deck, in a space that was five and a half feet tall. Of course, they were shorter then, but still that's very short to cram that many people and all of their supplies and gear.

The crossing took 66 days: much of a Stanford quarter. Most of it due to all of the delays. They were starting in September knowing they wouldn't arrive until November, a very dangerous time to go with storms. Once they got to the New World in the midst of a bitterly cold East Coast winter, the leaders were William Brewster, William Bradford, and John Carver.

Of the 102 passengers, 39 were children, and only nine of the adults were over 40 years old. You've got to be young to survive something like this.

The ship routine included feeding over 100 passengers three times a day. Each morning and each evening, they would meet on deck to read the Scriptures and to pray together. Of course, they especially majored on the Scriptures about the Lord taking His people through deep waters, such as crossing the Red Sea or Noah or Jonah or Paul on his various voyages.

One of their favorites was Psalm 107. I'll read part that really captures what they experienced: Psalm 107, verses 23 to 32. "Those who go down to the sea and ships who do business on great waters, they have seen the works of the Lord and His wonders in the deep. For He spoke and raised and stirred up a storm, stormy wind, which lifted up the waves of the sea. They rose up to the heavens. They went down to the depths. Their soul melted away in misery. They reeled and staggered like drunken men. They were at their wit's end. Then they cried out to the Lord in their trouble, and He brought them out of their distresses. He caused the storm to be still so that the waves of the sea were hushed, just as Jesus did on Galilee. Then they were glad because they were quiet. He guided them to their desired haven. Let them give thanks to the Lord for His loving kindness and for His wonders to the sons of men. Let them extol Him also in the congregation of the people and praise Him at the seat of the elders."

Then came their life between two worlds. As they saw England disappear, there were many tears as they knew they would almost certainly never see their beloved England again. They settled to the daily routine above and below deck.

There they were on this little ship with the best and the worst of humanity companioning on the heaving decks: the pilgrims and the tough seamen who were hardened and degraded by the brutal seafaring life. The sailors used to curse with every word they could think of until the women ran down below deck. One profane seaman bragged that he would throw half of them overboard before they ever arrived at their destination.

All of a sudden, he, the profane seaman, got very sick and died. Everyone felt the hand of God had silenced this profane man.

The weather worsened and the boat was a tiny speck of humanity floating on mountainous waves. The water washed over the decks, just like Psalm 107: up on the mountains, down to the depths, never dry, everything wet, and not knowing if the next wave would send the ship to the bottom.

All of the passengers were ordered below deck, but of course there was a teenage boy who was sure he knew better than the captain. John Howland went up on deck and immediately was washed overboard. The cry went up, "Man overboard," but there was not a chance they could go back. As the ship tipped, a rope swung out from the ship and he was able to grab it. They managed to use a boat hook to catch his jacket and pull him on board.

Everybody felt that God had reached out and saved this young man. Actually, the Lord had plans for that young man. We know one of his descendants. He was a very fine cardiologist who saved Steve's life about 10 years ago when he almost died. He's also been a church elder and is one of the elders on the elder board for our ministry. He's a descendant of that young whippersnapper. We're glad that God reached out and protected him. The storm still raged and the main beam of the ship buckled as if the ship's back were broken. The ship could easily have gone down at that point. They prayed and then remembered they'd brought a huge screw from Leyden to be able to screw the beams in place as they built houses. They were able to get this under the broken beam and winch it back into place, and they were able to say a line. I'm sure they were thanking God they had brought that screw and didn't sell it or leave it behind.

During the voyage, a baby boy was born named Oceanus. Christopher Jones, the ship master, ruled his crew with an iron hand, but he knew a man when he saw him and he learned to respect his strange passengers and their faith.

At last, the cry went out, "Land ho!" After 66 days—that's nine and a half weeks at an average speed of two miles per hour, about two-thirds of an easy walking pace—they had been sailing against the Gulf Stream, which nobody knew about at the time. They had planned to land in Virginia right near Jamestown and be part of the Virginia Compact, a government agreement with the colonists. But instead, the storms had blown them north to Cape Cod, and the winter was already freezing with snow and sleet as New England winters can be.

They tried to sail south, but the wind stopped, and they almost lost the ship on some shoals and had to go back and realize they needed to explore and find a place there. And so they did. They stayed on the ship and explored up and down the coast and found a perfect place for building a colony, which is now what we call Plymouth, where the historical village is.

On Cape Cod Bay, it had a harbor that could hold many ships, a deep harbor, sweet water and streams coming down, and a hill. They could see that they could build their village on the side of this hill facing the sea and dreamed of having a fort at the top, which they eventually did.

But here it was freezing cold. No safe ways. Nothing. No nice warm bed. Just lots of snow and cold and wind. And the storm had blown them completely north of Jamestown. And that was God. He wanted to start something different. He had used that storm to separate them from Jamestown, which was full of opportunists fighting against each other, treating the Native Americans badly.

They almost got wiped out by the Native Americans because of that. And the Lord wanted to start something totally new with people who worshiped Him and who treated the Native Americans with respect. And the Lord led them to one of the few places up and down the coast that was not currently occupied by a Native American tribe.

As they were about to land, the strangers among them who were not pilgrims—they had joined courtesy of the merchants—were also opportunists and did not worship the Lord. And they began to realize, "We're not under the Jamestown, Virginia compact. We can do whatever we want." The pilgrim leadership, led by William Brewster, realized this was a threat to the welfare of the whole colony. If the people were not working together, the whole colony would surely die and perish. So Brewster prayed. Brewster is probably the one who wrote the Mayflower Compact.

It was the beginning of democracy in the new world. They agreed they would elect leaders and obey those leaders and obey the government that was set up. This was the beginning of democracy and the new approach to government here in this country. It was a very significant step in the development of this country, and they all signed it before going ashore.

The first winter, they almost starved. They didn't have enough food upon arriving there. There was no game about, no place to acquire food. As they were nearing the end of the winter, they were down to five kernels of corn a day.

As they had been exploring for a good site, they found mounds in a field, an abandoned Indian field, dug these mounds up, and found buried baskets full of Indian corn. They realized that that was God's provision for them to survive. They promised themselves and God that they would repay it if they could find out who to repay, which I think they did later.

With starvation comes disease. That winter, half of them died, probably from scurvy, pneumonia, and other complications. Every day, they dealt with death. They knew they were being watched by Native Americans, and they were afraid. They buried the dead at night because they didn't want the Natives to know how few were left.

Any pilgrim who could still stand was nursing everybody else. That included the sailors who had made life so hard for them. Even their fiery little military commander, Miles Standish, whose wife was among the first to die, was there tenderly caring for everyone else through the long, hard winters.

Finally, in the spring, the elders were meeting in the common house they had built on shore. And all of a sudden, an Indian brave walks in and greeted them in English.

"Welcome, English. I am Samaset. I want beer."

Apparently, he had learned English from English fishermen and fur trappers who had been coming for years from England to the Cape Cod banks. In addition to learning English, he acquired the love of beer from them as well, which is what the English drank at that time. They thought water was not healthy. They drank beer, and probably a lot of their water was contaminated. That may have been a wiser choice.

Here they were meeting with a Native American who could speak their language, and they were trying to figure out what to do as they were praying. What to do? In walks a native who could speak English. He spent the night, and then several days later, he brought in a good friend of his, Squanto, of whom you've probably heard. I'm going to take another digression to tell you Squanto's story, because this too was God's preparation. Squanto, years before, had been captured by an English sea captain and taken to England where he was a slave for nine years. He learned English there, and his owners took pity on him and sent him back to the New World. But the sea captain tricked him and rather than releasing him, sailed to Spain and sold him to a monastery. There he actually became a true believer in Jesus. The monks too took pity on him and paid passage for him to get back to England and then back to the New World.

At last, he was walking back to his own village and his own people. When he arrived, such sorrow met his eyes: the entire tribe had been wiped out, probably by smallpox, unknowingly brought by the English fishermen and fur traders who had antibodies, but the Native Americans had no antibodies to smallpox and died in large numbers. Here he was back home, but there was no home.

He was adopted by neighboring tribes of Wampanoags and lived with them until the pilgrims arrived. When he met the pilgrims, he realized that they were his new family, and this was his calling. They were fellow Christians. He spoke English. Once he joined them, he never left. They became his people. If it had not been for him, they would never have survived.

They had been craftsmen, and Brewster had taught in the university. If you think about it, how would any of us have done arriving in that type of a situation? I doubt very much that most of us would survive.

Through Squanto, they learned where to fish, how to catch the deer, where the wild turkeys run, how to tread eels out of the mud, how to get clams and oysters, and how to live and plant. You probably heard in grade school about planting a herring in every hill of corn, and it was Squanto who taught the pilgrims to do that. They and he realized that God had brought all of them through so much loss and change, and yet strengthened them through it and made them brothers.

In April, the Mayflower returned to England. The captain offered anybody a free trip back if they wanted to return, but he was not surprised that none of them went. It was quite a moment for them to see that ship disappear over the horizon. Now they were alone, just the pilgrims and God. No escape route back to England, no escape route off the shore either, because they had been able to escape to the ship if they felt threatened. But now that escape route was gone. Squanto served as interpreter to the Wampanoag tribe and introduced them to Chief Massasoit. Through his help, they established a treaty that was of mutual benefit. Not a treaty where the Europeans got everything and the natives were tricked out of everything. It was actually fair to both sides. They agreed to be allies if either of them were attacked. They agreed that if anyone from either side stole anything, they would be delivered over for justice. So it wasn't with the Europeans as the powerful ones. It was truly fair to both sides, and both sides stuck to it for 50 years. Truly a good chapter in Native American-European dealings.

The pilgrims, as Christians, firmly believed that the Native Americans were people created in the image of God just as they were, and so they treated them with equal honor rather than looking down on them as many Europeans did. They expressed their faith in reaching out and honoring these people equally even though they didn't understand them and had much fear. The pilgrims acted on this various times.

At one point, another native that had been working with Squanto came running in and told them that both Massasoit and Squanto had been captured by another tribe that was hostile to Massasoit's tribe and to the English. And so Miles Standish took 10 men and their blunderbusses, their guns, and made a midnight raid and were able to rescue Massasoit and Squanto.

Then through the summer, they were able to plant and harvest. At the end of the summer, there was a massive harvest. It was beyond their wildest dreams and prayers that it would be that much. It was so plentiful, they decided to invite their new friends and neighbors to a feast. They invited Chief Massasoit, and they thought he would come with maybe about five braves. On the appointed day, he showed up with 90 braves.

The Native Americans could see the look in their eyes and quickly headed out in the forest and came back with five deer. The first Thanksgiving was indeed a potluck, with the natives supplying barbecued roasted venison to go with the ducks and turkey, wild turkey, and eels, stewed eel and oysters and clams and cornbread and corn pudding and many other delectables. They had a wonderful three days of feasting. The natives stayed as long as the food lasted, giving thanks to God and running races, doing bow and arrow shooting contests. The natives danced some of their dances with the amazed pilgrims.

It was really the two peoples enjoying good fellowship together, both making speeches by interpreter that this friendship would last as long as the grass grew. And it did, at least for 50 years.

The next two winters were even worse than the first one. The Thanksgiving story, the Thanksgiving feast, that first one was not the end of the story. It was several years before they could celebrate again. The challenges were not nearly over. Several ships did arrive from England, but not a single bit of supplies for the colonies, just more hungry mouths to feed—opportunists that the merchants sent over who ate a lot and some helped and some didn't. One group of them on Christmas Day told the governor of Plymouth that it was against their conscience to work on Christmas Day.

While everyone else marched out to chop wood to keep the village warm in the cold, bitterly cold winter, they were playing games in the street. The governor came, collected the games, and told them it was against his conscience for some people to play while others were working. They learned that work every day was a necessity of survival for all of them.

They finally, at their request, were packed off to start their own colony down the bay. But they did not treat the Native Americans well. They lied, cheated, and stole from them.

The Native Americans, under a neighboring hostile tribe, the Narragansetts, went on the warpath gathering tribes and prepared to wipe both colonies out. Chief Massasoit quietly let the pilgrims know that he had refused to join that grouping on the warpath and let them know that they had better find the leaders and kill them or else they themselves would never survive if they waited for the natives to come.

The pilgrims knew with their small numbers, that was definitely true. So Miles Standish went with a few handpicked men to the other colony. The natives started showing up and acting in very insolent ways and bragging that "the knife around their neck would soon be in the breast of the Englishman."

The leader in particular had a real history. He had killed many English and French over the years. He boldly came to visit where Miles Standish was staying at this other colony and bragged that soon Standish would be another of his victims.

Standish, though bristling with anger, was waiting his time. Finally, this man who had killed so many showed up with four other braves who were huge. They were all in the room threatening. Standish was there with his eight men. At a quiet sign from Standish, their Indian friend closed and locked the door.

Standish started the attack on the chief and ended up using his knife to kill him. It was darkness and scuffle. They ended up with the braves who had been leading this war to wipe the English out, all of them dead, and the rest dispersed after that with fear.

The Indians knew that this stocky, fierce little captain was nobody to trifle with. That protected all of their lives that were hanging by a thread and had been so threatened because of these English opportunists. Thankfully, the opportunists were so frightened that they left for the English fishing fleet and went back to England, much to the relief of the pilgrims. Another time, the Narragansetts were on the warpath to wipe out the pilgrims, and they sent a brave who walked into the meeting hall of the leaders of the pilgrims with rattlesnake skin stuffed with arrows in its mouth and threw it down on the table as a challenge, saying, "We're coming to get you."

Can you imagine yourself in that position with all the women and the children? There was no way they could defend themselves from the number that were coming. They prayed what to do.

Then they made the decision. Miles Standish or Brewster, I've forgotten which, pulled out the arrows from the snakeskin, stuffed the snakeskin with gunpowder and shot, and handed it back to the brave to deliver to his chief.

When the chief saw this snake full of gunpowder and shot, he refused to receive it or even touch it. It was full of what the white man used to kill from a distance, and he wanted nothing to do with it. Every chief the brave took the skin to refused to receive it.

They disbanded, and again, the pilgrims were saved, and the snake came back to just be buried back in Plymouth.

They had other ships come from England, lots of hungry mouths, no supplies, and a reprimand from the merchants: "Why did you send the Mayflower back empty?" You're negligent, you're lazy, and threatening not to send any more supplies if they didn't send back fur and lumber and fish and all of that.

They did fill these ships with what they'd been collecting. They were hanging on by a thread, but they were there by God's grace.

Finally, three years later, they were able to celebrate again with a bounteous harvest. A ship arrived bringing their loved ones from Leiden, wives and children who had stayed behind. They'd been separated for three long years but were able to come back together in the new colony. And now they were really truly established.

So that's the Thanksgiving story. It's an amazing one of God's care for people who've been through loss and change, linking Squanto and these people that he might find his family in the Lord and enable them to survive—something that none of them could have orchestrated. It's an amazing story.

It's one that needs to be told, as so many people just call it Turkey Day now and it's the break before, in between Black Friday shopping. It's a story worth telling and worth knowing.

That's the end of the story, and I would love to hear if any of you have thoughts or additions, corrections. But as I have researched it, that's the story that I understand so far. I'm sure some of you, like I, have forebears who came on the Mayflower, and it's something that I'm thankful for. I have great admiration for these believers who would risk so much for their faith, and who trusted the Lord to come through so much.
